Nieves-Villanueva v. Soto-Rivera
133 F.3d 92, 48 Fed. R. Serv. 368, 1997 U.S. App. LEXIS 35975, 1997 WL 775545
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Filed: 1997-12-22
Docket No. 96-1285
Source: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/197702/nieves-villanueva-v-soto-rivera/
------------------------------------------------------------



                United States Court of Appeals                            United States Court of Appeals
                    For the First Circuit                                For the First Circuit
                                         

No. 96-1285

             CARLOS J. NIEVES-VILLANUEVA, et al.,

                   Plaintiffs, Appellants,

                              v.

          JOSE R. SOTO-RIVERA, Individually and as 
       Mayor of the Municipality of Canovanas, et al.,

                    Defendants, Appellees.

                                         

         APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

               FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

        [Hon. Hector M. Laffitte, U.S. District Judge]                                                                 

                                         

                            Before

                    Stahl, Circuit Judge,                                                    

                  Cyr, Senior Circuit Judge,                                                       

                  and Lynch, Circuit Judge.                                                      
                                         

   Carlos A. del Valle Cruz for appellants.                                       

   Miguel  Pagan, with  whom Pagan  &amp; Pagan  was on  brief, for                                                       
appellees.

                                         

                      December 22, 1997
                                         

          LYNCH,  Circuit Judge.    Plaintiffs are  fifty-one                      LYNCH,  Circuit Judge.                                           

former  "transitory"   or  non-permanent  employees   of  the

municipality of Canovanas, Puerto Rico.  A jury found against

their  claims that the  incoming New Progressive  Party (NPP)

administration  failed to renew their contracts of employment

in various municipal jobs because they were supporters of the

prior Popular  Democratic Party  (PDP) administration  and so

violated their rights under the First Amendment.1

          The  important  question  raised  by this  case  is

whether the district  court committed error in  admitting the

testimony of an expert witness.   The witness testified as to

what the law required and that her examination of plaintiffs'

personnel records led  to the conclusion that  plaintiffs had

been   improperly  hired  or  renewed  in  the  first  place.

Defendants did not testify this  was their reason at the time

of  their  decision  not  to   renew  plaintiffs'  contracts.

Although   such  expert  testimony   should  not   have  been

permitted,  we  consider any  alleged error  in light  of the

                                                    

1.  This  court has  reviewed  numerous  claims of  political
firings or demotions from Puerto  Rico.  In November of 1984,
the  PDP won  the  gubernatorial  election  in  Puerto  Rico.
Before that,  the governor's office  was held by a  member of
the NPP.  A first wave of cases involved outright dismissals;
the second wave  involved adverse actions less  than outright
dismissals.   That history is  recited in Agosto-de-Feliciano                                                                         
v. Aponte-Roque,  889 F.2d  1209 (1st Cir.  1989).   In 1992,                           
control   of  the  governor's   office  and  of   some  local
governments switched, and  the NPP came back to  power.  Now,
this  court  is faced  with  another wave  of  litigation (we
hesitate to count  which wave this is), brought  this time by
PDP members.

                             -2-                                          2

evidence as a whole, and particularly in light of the judge's

instructions to the jury.  In the circumstances of this case,

we consider  the alleged errors harmless and  affirm the jury

verdicts.

                              I.                                          I

          Plaintiffs  sued,  inter alios,2  Jose  Soto-Rivera

("Soto") and the Municipality of Canovanas under  42 U.S.C.  

1983, alleging  that they  had been  dismissed  due to  their

political  beliefs  and  in violation  of  their  due process

rights.    The  complaint  sought  reinstatement,  injunctive

relief,  compensatory and  punitive  damages, and  attorney's

fees.

          On  defendants' motion  for  summary judgment,  the

district court  dismissed  plaintiffs'  due  process  claims,

noting  that, under First  Circuit precedent and  Puerto Rico

law,  transitory employees generally  do not have  a property

interest in continued employment beyond their yearly terms of

appointment.  See Caro v.  Aponte-Roque, 878 F.2d 1, 4-5 (1st                                                   

Cir.  1989); see  also Mel ndez  v.  Municipio de  Arroyo, 96                                                                     

J.T.S. Case No. 68, at p.  1077 (P.R. Sup. Ct. May 15,  1996)

(reaffirming that, as a matter of Puerto Rico law, transitory

employees  generally have  no "legitimate  expectation" to  a

                                                    

2.  The district  court dismissed plaintiffs'  claims against
the other municipal defendants prior to trial.

                             -3-                                          3

renewal  of   their  contracts);  Departamento   de  Recursos                                                                         

Naturales v. Correa, 118 D.P.R. 689, 697 (1987) (same).3                               

          Before trial,  defendants retained  Blanca Santiago

as an expert in governmental personnel matters to examine the

plaintiffs' personnel  records.  Santiago's  report concluded

that  plaintiffs' initial  appointments and,  in  some cases,

renewal appointments  were contrary to Puerto  Rico municipal

law,  and that  the previous  administration  had employed  a

"subterfuge"  to  renew the  plaintiffs' appointments  and to

evade  a prohibition on making personnel decisions within two

months of  a general election.   The report also  opined that

plaintiffs  did  not   have  "a  legitimate   expectation  of

retaining employment."  Finally,  the report concluded  that,

under the law of Puerto Rico, "the Municipality  of Canovanas

could not continue extending said transitory appointments."

          Upon receiving Santiago's report, plaintiffs made a

motion   in   limine   to   exclude   Santiago's   testimony.

Plaintiffs' principal objection was that the expert witness's

opinion concerning the  propriety of plaintiffs' appointments

                                                    

3.  Defendants also moved  for summary judgment on the claims
for  damages on  qualified immunity grounds.     The district
court  denied defendants'  motion,  holding  that before  the
events in  1993, the  First Circuit  had clearly  established
that First  Amendment protection  extended to  political non-
renewals of employment.  See  Caro, 878 F.2d at 2-4; Figueroa                                                                         
v.  Aponte-Roque, 864  F.2d 947,  951 (1st  Cir. 1989).   The                            
district  court determined that there existed a genuine issue
of material fact concerning defendants' motives  in declining
to renew plaintiffs' transitory appointments.  

                             -4-                                          4

was not relevant  to liability.  Defendants did  not maintain

that  Soto  did  not renew  plaintiffs'  appointments  due to

irregularities  in how  they were  appointed.   The  district

court denied plaintiffs' motion.

                             II.                                         II

          We state  the facts  as the  jury could have  found

them,  in  the context  of  the  evidence  as a  whole,  with

particular  emphasis on  the evidence  allegedly admitted  in

error.

          Plaintiffs said they were affiliated with  the PDP,

one of Puerto Rico's major  political parties.  In 1992, Soto

was elected Mayor  of Canovanas as the candidate  of the NPP,

the main rival of the PDP.  Soto was the first  NPP candidate

elected as Mayor of Canovanas in several decades.

          Plaintiffs  had been  appointed  by  the prior  PDP

mayor, Esteban Melendez-Rivera, to various  municipal jobs as

transitory  employees.  Those  jobs included manual  labor in

the  Public Works  Department,  janitorial work  in municipal

offices,  clerical  work,  and other  lower  level  jobs with

minimal   salaries.      Under   Puerto   Rico's   Autonomous

Municipalities Act, 21 L.P.R.A.    4554, transitory employees

may be appointed for a  limited term, generally not to exceed

one year.   Although plaintiffs, unlike other  civil servants

in Puerto Rico, had no  formal tenure in their jobs following

the  expiration of their contracts, many had been reappointed

                             -5-                                          5

for  several one-year  terms as  a matter  of course.   Other

plaintiffs were in their first annual term of employment.

          On January 15, 1993, three days after taking office

as Mayor of  Canovanas, Soto informed most  of the plaintiffs

that  their positions as transitory employees had expired and

that he would  not renew their  appointments.  The  remaining

plaintiffs'  appointments  were   temporarily  extended,  but

eventually their appointments expired as well.

          Plaintiffs  testified  that   they  campaigned  for

Esteban   Melendez-Rivera,  the PDP  candidate,  in the  1992

mayoral election.  Plaintiffs testified that they had engaged

in  various PDP political  activities on behalf  of Melendez,

including  attending political meetings or taking part in the

campaign  rallies known  as caravanas  ("caravans") that  are                                                 

typical of mayoral campaigning in  Puerto Rico.  Many of them

testified that Soto  solicited their support, and,  when they

said they would support the incumbent PDP mayor instead, Soto

threatened  to  leave  them  without  employment  after   the

election.  Many plaintiffs also testified that they observed,

after their non-renewals, NPP  members performing the  duties

of the jobs they had performed as transitory employees.

          In  support   of  their  First   Amendment  claims,

plaintiffs  put  in evidence  their personnel  files, arguing

that  there  was nothing  in  them that  would  indicate poor

performance.   Plaintiffs also presented an expert witness in

                             -6-                                          6

personnel administration to bolster their claims of political

discrimination.4

          Defendants'  position   was  that   Soto  had   not

considered plaintiffs' political  affiliation in his decision

to allow  their contracts to  expire.   They presented  three

witnesses:  Mayor  Soto,  Vice-Mayor  Miguel  Jimenez-Carrion

("Jimenez"),  and Blanca  Santiago, their  expert witness  on

government  personnel  administration.    Soto  categorically

denied  the  plaintiffs' allegations  that he  had threatened

their jobs if they supported the incumbent.  He noted that he

had  retained or  hired PDP  members to  municipal jobs.   He

testified that he had allowed plaintiffs' contracts to expire

because their services  were no longer needed.   Jimenez gave

essentially  the same version  of events.   Neither testified

that they had  not renewed the contracts  because plaintiffs'

appointments had been irregular.

Defendants' Expert                              

          Defendants'   expert   witness,   Blanca  Santiago,

testified that the plaintiffs' personnel records demonstrated

that,  in many  cases, their  appointments  were contrary  to

Puerto Rico law.  In particular, Santiago testified that many

employees  had been  on the  payroll in  excess of  one year,

                                                    

4.   The  plaintiffs did  not  order the  transcript of  that
portion of  the trial  that included  their expert  witness's
testimony.   That omission  complicates our  analysis, as  we
explain below.

                             -7-                                          7

sometimes  without any  documented reappointment,  and opined

that this violated  the Autonomous Municipalities Act,  which

provides  that  the  appointment  of "[t]ransitory  employees

shall not  exceed  one  (1) year  . . .  ."   21  L.P.R.A.   

4554(c).  Santiago also testified that many of the plaintiffs

had  been illegally appointed within  two months of a general

election,  in  violation  of a  prophylactic  prohibition  on

government  personnel   decisions  commonly   known  as   the

"electoral ban."  See 21 L.P.R.A.   4564; 3 L.P.R.A.    1337.                                 

Santiago testified further that, in some cases, the personnel

records had been manipulated in  order to make it appear that

plaintiffs'  appointments were  not within the  electoral ban

period.

          Defense counsel then questioned Santiago to  elicit

testimony to the effect that courts have held that transitory

employees  do  not have  a  right  to  the renewal  of  their

contracts.   Defense counsel  accomplished this  objective by

reading passages from court decisions holding that transitory

employees in  Puerto Rico  have no  reasonable or  legitimate

expectation  of  continued  renewal of  their  contracts that

would entitle them to  administrative due process protections

before  allowing their contracts  to expire, and  then asking

Santiago to comment.  This  was done although the due process

claims had been dismissed.

                             -8-                                          8

          Santiago  testified  that, under  court  decisions,

"[o]nce  [a  transitory  employee's]  appointment  ends   the

transitory employee . . . doesn't have any . . . other right,

regardless of the fact that his appointment has been extended

for a  period of time  that we may call  'excessively long.'"

Plaintiffs'  counsel objected to this testimony on the ground

that it misstated the law.  That objection was overruled.

          Soon   afterwards,   defense    counsel   continued

questioning  Santiago  on  the  legal  status  of  transitory

employees:

          Q. I am going to review . . . the case of
          Fermin  Orta  et   al.  versus  Pedro  A.                                                               
          Padilla, Municipality of  Trujillio Alto,                                                               
          et al. .  . . .  I'm going to read to you                            
          from  the  translation  of  that  opinion
          . . . .

At this  point, plaintiffs  again objected,  noting that  the

case   concerned  the   due  process  rights   of  transitory

employees, and  that the  sole claim on  trial was  the First

Amendment  claim.    Again,   the  district  court  overruled

plaintiffs' objection.   Defendants  resumed questioning  the

witness about the  law articulated in that case.5  Plaintiffs

                                                    

5.   Defense  Counsel:   "[I]t  says, the  opinion:   After a
careful examination of the service and  appointment contracts
of  these 23  appellees,  we  find  that  the  only  contract
terminated before the expiration date was that of Juana Cruz.
The other 22 employees were notified that the contracts would
be terminated at the expiration  date of the same.  In  light
of  the  prevailing  principles, we  must  conclude  that the
termination  of the contract of those 22 transitory employees
was valid  at law  because the municipality  did not  have to
provide them with the  regulatory guarantees mentioned above.

                             -9-                                          9

objected  again,  noting,  "She's testifying  [to]  what  are

basically jury  instructions." The  district court  initially

sustained plaintiffs' objection,  but then permitted  defense

counsel to continue  questioning the witness in  this manner.

Defense counsel proceeded  to read excerpts from  the Supreme

Court  of Puerto  Rico's decision  in Correa,  and  from this                                                        

court's decision in  Cheveras-Pacheco v. Rivera-Gonzalez, 809                                                                    

F.2d  125, 129  (1st  Cir.  1987)  (holding  that  transitory

employees  do not  have  a  property  interest  in  continued

employment).   Plaintiffs'  counsel again  protested,  and  a

conference  was  held  outside  the  presence  of  the  jury.

Plaintiffs'  counsel  asked the  judge  to strike  Santiago's

testimony or  give a curative instruction, stating explicitly

that it is against the law for a  municipal government to let

a transitory employee's contract expire if the primary reason

is  the employee's political affiliation.  The district court

refused, saying plaintiffs had opened the door with their own

                                                    

The trial  court erred  in  ruling that  the termination  was
unlawful."
    Santiago:  "The interesting thing about that case is that
there  were --  there  were  22  transitory  employees  whose
appointments  were to  end,  and there  was another  group of
employees  in  which  --  in  which  case  the  decision  was
different,  and the  matter of  discrimination  was approved.
But in the case of the transitory ones their appointments had
ended."

                             -10-                                          10

expert  witness and that they could cross-examine Santiago on

the illegality of firing employees for political reasons.6

          On  cross-examination,  Santiago  stated  that  the

legal opinions she provided on direct examination  concerning

the  status   of  transitory   employees   and  the   alleged

illegalities in plaintiffs' original  appointments were based

solely on Commonwealth law, not federal law.  When questioned

about  the case  law  of this  court which  has  held that  a

decision  not to renew  a transitory employees'  contract may

not be  primarily based  on political  affiliation under  the

First  Amendment,  the  witness was  evasive.    Although she

agreed  that transitory employees could not be discharged for

political reasons, she insisted that  this did not apply when

                                                    

6.  The  Court:  "Counsel, the  problem with you is  that you
don't   make  a  distinction  between  the  --  the  witness'
credibility  and  what  is  admissible.    She --  Mr.  Pagan
[defense  counsel]  read  to her  certain  passages  of cases
saying  that -- concerning transitory employees.  I'm certain
you're  going  to  read  her a  part  saying  if  you  take a
transitory employee  and discharge him for  political reasons
it's illegal, and she has to  agree with that.  See?   That's
the way you neutralize that.  I'm not going to teach  you how
to practice  law."   (At oral  argument, plaintiff's  counsel
argued that this last sentence  was particularly prejudicial.
However, as this admonition did  not occur in the presence of
the jury, we examine only  the impact of the district court's
ruling itself.)  
     The judge continued,  "[T]he Orta case was  brought [in]                                                  
by  your  [expert]  witness, and  that  opened  the door  for
[defense counsel] to bring [in] the Orta case. . . . Once you                                                    
open  the door then you can't complain. . . . I will instruct
the jury on  the law  at the  proper time, and  they have  to
follow the law as I tell them, not as what counsel tells them
the law is."

                             -11-                                          11

a  contract expired because,  she said, such  an employee was

not discharged.

Closing Arguments                             

          In  closing arguments,  plaintiffs' counsel  argued

that the  witnesses' testimony, principally  the plaintiffs',

established that the incoming NPP administration's motive for

refusing  to renew  plaintiffs'  contracts  was reprisal  for

their  support of  the previous  PDP mayor.   Defense counsel

strongly contested  the plaintiffs'  credibility, and  argued

that Soto never  considered plaintiffs' political affiliation

in his decision not to renew plaintiffs' contracts.

          Defense counsel also  made reference to  Santiago's

testimony,  arguing that  the employees  were  transitory and

that their appointments had been in violation of  Puerto Rico

municipal law.    Defense counsel also argued  that the Mayor

would have  been in violation of  that law if he  had renewed

their  appointments.    Defense  counsel  made  reference  to

Santiago's  testimony that transitory employees do not have a

reasonable  expectation of  retaining their jobs  after their

contracts  expire,   arguing  that  plaintiffs'   expert  had

distorted the law  in suggesting otherwise.   Defense counsel

asked  rhetorically, "[A]fter  the appointment  expired . . .

what are  their [sic]  rights of those  employees?   And that                                

Your Honor is  going to tell you, see,  in the instructions."

Defense  counsel   noted  that,  unlike   plaintiffs'  expert

                             -12-                                          12

witness,   "She  never  . . .  tell  [sic]  us  whether  [the                                                     

plaintiffs]   were    dismissed   or   not    for   political

discriminatory reasons.  That is for you to decide."  Defense

counsel did not  argue that the reasons  for the non-renewals

were that plaintiffs' appointments were irregular.

Instructions                        

          The judge instructed the jury that its duty was "to

follow the law as I shall state it to you" and that it should

not "base  [its] verdict upon any view  of the law other than

that given in  the instructions of the Court."  The court did

not otherwise specifically instruct the jury to disregard the

expert witnesses' opinions concerning the applicable law, but

rather  said expert  testimony  should  be  treated  just  as

testimony from any other witness.

          Significantly,  however, the  judge instructed  the

jury  that  any  irregularities in  the  appointments  of the

plaintiffs could not be used as a pretext for violating their

First Amendment rights:

               Now, conduct purportedly  engaged in
          consonance   with    the   Puerto    Rico
          personnel's law and regulation [sic] does                                                         
          not control a  claim alleging a violation
          of the  employees' First  Amendment right
          of political affiliation.
               A new administration  cannot use the
          doctrine of compliance with  state law or
          nullity under state  law as  a cover  for
          discharges, transfers  and discrimination
          based solely on political affiliation.
               Similarly,   a  new   administration
          cannot use the  fact that plaintiffs were
          hired  during  the  electoral prohibition

                         13  -13-

          period  or   "veda"  as  a   pretext  for                                        
          political discrimination.   In  the final
          analysis, the question of motivation is a
          question of fact.

The court also instructed:

               If   you   find   that   plaintiffs'
          political affiliation was  the motivating
          factor  for  the   non-renewal  of  their
          appointments, then you  may find for  the
          plaintiffs.

The court also gave this instruction:

               However,    if    you    find   that
          plaintiffs' appointments were not renewed
          because they  had been  appointed by  the
          former administration in violation of the
          personnel  and  electoral  laws  and  not
          because    of    plaintiffs'    political
          affiliation,  then you  may find  for the
          defendants.

The  judge  further   instructed  that,  although  transitory

employees  do not have tenure in  their jobs, their contracts

may   not  be  allowed  to  expire  for  political  reasons.7
Finally,  in response to  a request from  plaintiffs' counsel

                                                    

7.  The  Court: "Transitory -- the plaintiffs  in this action
were  transitory employees of  the Municipality of Canovanas.
Puerto  Rico   law  permits  the  employment   of  transitory
employees appointed for  a fixed term.  The  duration of this
designation  shall correspond  to the  period  for which  the
position was created.
          "The  law   provides   that   once   a   transitory
appointment expires,  defendant may terminate  the transitory
employee . . . for any reason  except if that reason is based
on political affiliation.   Defendant . . .  asserts that the
reason for not renewing plaintiffs' appointments or contracts
was that plaintiffs' contracts had expired and that they were
not   renewed  for   valid  reasons  wholly   independent  of
plaintiffs' political affiliation.
          "Plaintiffs  claims  [sic] that  their  position as                                               
transitory  employees  were  not  renewed  because  of  their
political affiliation.  So that is the issue."

                             -14-                                          14

for a  curative instruction,  the judge  instructed that  the

jury was  to consider  only evidence  that they  believed was

known to the decisionmakers at the time plaintiffs' contracts

were not renewed.8

Verdict                   

          The  verdict  form   asked,  as  to  each   of  the

plaintiffs, "Do you find by  a preponderance of the  evidence

that the motivating  factor for not renewing  the appointment

of [plaintiff] was [his or her]  political affiliation?"  The

jury answered no in each case.

                             III.                                         III

          We review the district court's decision to admit or

exclude  evidence for  abuse  of  discretion.    See  General                                                                         

Electric Co. v. Joiner, 1997 WL 764563, at  *3 (U.S. Dec. 15,                                  

1997); Knowlton v. Deseret Med.  Inc., 930 F.2d 116, 124 (1st                                                 

Cir. 1991).

Legal Principles                            

          Because  the  parties exhibit  some  confusion over

long-established legal  principles in  this  area, we  repeat

them.   In  Elrod v. Burns,  427 U.S.  347 (1976),  a divided                                      

                                                    

8.   The  Court:  "In   determining  whether  the  defendants
discriminated or not, you  are not to consider any  testimony
or  evidence that you believe was not  present at the time of
[sic]  the  decision  not  to  renew  plaintiffs'  transitory                
appointment  was taken, for if the irregularity or misconduct
was  not discovered until  after the employee's  contract was
not renewed, the  employer could not  have been motivated  by
knowledge of it, and he  cannot now claim that the employee's
contract was not renewed for that reason."

                             -15-                                          15

Supreme  Court granted  some  First  Amendment protection  to

employees terminated  because of their  political affiliation

where political affiliation was not a  reasonably appropriate

requirement for the job.  See id. at 359 (plurality opinion).                                             

As  Justice Stewart,  concurring,  said, a  "nonpolicymaking,

nonconfidential government employee [cannot] be discharged or

threatened   with   discharge   from  a   job   that   he  is

satisfactorily  performing  upon  the   sole  ground  of  his

political beliefs."  Id.  at 375 (Stewart, J.,  concurring in                                    

judgment).   In Branti  v. Finkel, 445  U.S. 507  (1980), the                                             

Supreme  Court reaffirmed Elrod, and explained that the First                                           

Amendment prohibits termination  of public employees  because

of their political affiliation  unless "the hiring  authority

can  demonstrate that  party  affiliation  is an  appropriate

requirement  for  the  effective performance  of  the  public

office involved."  Branti, 445 U.S. at 518.9                                     

          This court has held that the  Elrod-Branti doctrine                                                                

applies to a local government's decision whether to renew the

contract of a  transitory employee.  See  Cheveras-Pacheco v.                                                                      

Rivera-Gonzalez,  809   F.2d  125   (1st  Cir.   1987).     A                           

municipality may not allow transitory employees' contracts to

expire  if the  primary motive  is to  punish them  for their

political  affiliation.   See id.  at 127-29.   This  is true                                             

                                                    

9.  Defendants have  never  suggested  that  political  party
affiliation was  an appropriate  requirement for  any of  the
jobs that were held by the plaintiffs.

                             -16-                                          16

regardless  of whether the  employees have been  renewed on a

regular basis prior to their dismissal or, as is true of some

of plaintiffs here, have served  only one term.  See Figueroa                                                                         

v. Aponte-Roque,  864 F.2d 947,  951 (1st Cir. 1989).   Thus,                           

the  fact  that  a  transitory  employee  does  not   have  a

reasonable  expectation of renewal  in his or  her employment

that would require due process protections does  not defeat a

First Amendment claim.

          In Rutan v. Republican  Party of Ill., 497  U.S. 62                                                           

(1990),   the  Supreme  Court   held  that  the  Elrod-Branti                                                                         

prohibition  against  political   affiliation  discrimination

applied  not  only  to discharges,  but  also  to significant

personnel  decisions such  as whether  to hire  or promote  a

public employee.   See Rutan, 487 U.S. at 79.  Hence, even if                                        

the  decision  not  to renew  a  transitory  appointment10 is

considered a hiring decision rather than a  discharge,  Rutan                                                                         

reinforces our rule announced in Cheveras-Pacheco.                                                               

                                                    

10.   As a practical  matter, given the Commonwealth's merit-
based  system  for  hiring  and   discharging  civil  service
employees, the risk is greater that transitory employees, who
may be more  easily hired and fired, may  suffer from the use
of unlawful patronage practices.  See 21 L.P.R.A.   4554.  It                                                 
has   been    said   that   "invidious    political   [party]
discrimination  is  mainly  directed  against  humble  public
employees  or [those]  with scarce  resources."   Casiano  v.                                                                     
Departamento de Educacion,  97 J.T.S. Case No. 33,  at p. 718                                     
(P.R.  Sup.  Ct.  March  19,  1997)  (Fuster-Berlingeri,  J.,
dissenting from denial of certiorari).

                             -17-                                          17

          And  the  Elrod-Branti-Rutan   principle  has  been                                                  

reinforced recently by the Supreme Court.  In Board of County                                                                         

Comm'rs v.  Umbehr, 116 S.  Ct. 2342 (1996) and  O'Hare Truck                                                                         

Serv., Inc. v. City of Northlake, 116 S. Ct. 2353 (1996), the                                            

Supreme  Court  held   that  the  First   Amendment  provides

protection  to  independent  contractors   similar  to  those

afforded  government employees.   See Umbehr,  116 S.  Ct. at                                                        

2345-46   (termination  of   a  contract   in  reprisal   for

contractor's criticism of county government);  O'Hare, 116 S.                                                                 

Ct. at 2355-56  (removal of an independent contractor  from a

list of towing  services employed by the  city in retaliation

for supporting opposing political party).  

Expert Testimony on the Law                                       

          Aspects of Santiago's testimony are very troubling.

Certain parts  of her  testimony --  for example,  concerning

actual personnel practices, the various  categories of public

employees and  the like -- are unobjectionable.  But Santiago

also testified as to the  holdings of various opinions of the

Supreme Court of Puerto Rico  and by reference, of this court

(over  objection), and  to the  legal  conclusion that  these

appointments were  in violation  of law  (without objection).

To  exacerbate  matters,  her  testimony  may  be  charitably

described  as  misleading  at  best  as  to  the   rights  of

transitory employees as a matter of federal law.

                             -18-                                          18

          It  is black-letter  law  that  "[i]t  is  not  for

witnesses to instruct the jury as to applicable principles of

law, but for the judge."  United States v. Newman, 49 F.3d 1,                                                             

7  (1st Cir. 1995) (quoting Marx &amp; Co. v. Diners' Club, Inc.,                                                                        

550 F.2d  505, 512 (2d Cir.  1977)).  At least  seven circuit

courts have held  that the Federal Rules of Evidence prohibit

such testimony,  and we now join them as to the general rule.

See Burkhart  v. Washington  Metro. Area  Transit Auth.,  112                                                                   

F.3d  1207, 1212-14  (D.C. Cir.  1997)  (reversible error  to

allow an  expert  in police  practices  to opine  on  whether

police  officers'  efforts  in  communicating  with  a   deaf

plaintiff   were   enough  to   satisfy   federal  disability

statutes);  Snap-Drape, Inc.  v. Commissioner,  98  F.3d 194,                                                         

197-98  (5th  Cir.  1996)   (trial  court  properly  excluded

taxpayer's  expert reports  as containing  nothing more  than

legal  arguments  concerning  the  tax treatment  of  certain

dividends); Berry v. City  of Detroit, 25 F.3d 1342,  1353-54                                                 

(6th  Cir. 1994)  (finding inadmissible  the  comments of  an

expert in police  practices on the meaning of  the legal term

"deliberate indifference" in a civil rights case); Aguilar v.                                                                      

International Longshoreman's Union, Local  #10, 966 F.2d 443,                                                          

447  (9th  Cir.  1992) (testimony  of  purported  expert that

workers reasonably  and  foreseeably  relied  on  defendants'

promises  addressed   "matters   of  law   for  the   court's

determination" that  were "inappropriate subjects  for expert

                             -19-                                          19

testimony");  Specht v. Jensen, 853 F.2d 805 (10th Cir. 1988)                                          

(en banc)  (reversible error to  allow an expert  witness who

was an attorney to give his opinions on  what was required to

make consent to a search  effective); Adalman v. Baker, Watts                                                                         

&amp;  Co.,   807  F.2d  359,   366  (4th  Cir.   1986)  (finding                  

inadmissible  proffered  expert opinion  concerning  whether,

under  securities laws, disclosure  of a particular  fact was

required in  the course of negotiating a transaction); Marx &amp;                                                                         

Co.  v. Diners'  Club,  Inc.,  550 F.2d  505  (2d Cir.  1977)                                        

(securities lawyer, called as an expert, could not testify to

the legal  obligations created under  a contract).   To state

the general  rule is not  to decide the far  more complicated

and measured question of when there is a transgression of the

rule.   We outline some  of the  considerations and  conclude

that the rule has been transgressed here.  We leave to future

cases  the defining of  the contours  of application  of this

rule.

          In  our legal  system,  purely legal  questions and

instructions to  the jury  on the  law to  be applied  to the

resolution  of the  dispute before  them  is exclusively  the

domain of  the judge.  Accordingly, expert  testimony on such

purely  legal issues  is rarely  admissible.   As the  Second

Circuit has  noted, "The  danger is that  the jury  may think

that the 'expert'  in the particular branch of  the law knows

                             -20-                                          20

more than the judge   -- surely an impermissible inference in

our system of law."  Marx &amp; Co., 550 F.2d at 512.                                           

          The one well-recognized exception  is for questions

of  foreign law, where the judge may be aided by the expert's

assistance.   See Adalman, 807 F.2d  at 366; Marx &amp;  Co., 550                                                                    

F.2d at 510;  1 McCormick on  Evidence   12,  at 50 (John  W.                                                  

Strong,  ed., 4th  ed. 1992);  7 Wigmore  on Evidence    1953                                                                 

(Chadbourne rev.  1978).   Even in the  case of  foreign law,

under modern practice the testimony is generally given to the

judge, outside of the presence of  the jury, and is meant  to

assist the judge in determining the appropriate instructions.

See Adalman, 807 F.2d  at 366; 9  Wigmore on Evidence    2558                                                                 

(Chadbourne rev. 1978).  Here,  the testimony was plainly not

offered to assist the judge,  who has presided over many such

political discharge cases, and was presented to the jury.

          Because  the  jury   does  not  decide  such   pure

questions of law,  such testimony is not helpful  to the jury

and so  does not  fall within  the literal terms  of Fed.  R.

Evid.  702, which  allows expert testimony  "[i]f scientific,

technical  or  other  specialized knowledge  will  assist the

trier of  fact to understand  the evidence or to  determine a

fact in  issue . . . ."   As the D.C. Circuit  noted, "Expert

testimony that consists of legal  conclusions cannot properly

assist the trier of fact in either respect . . . ." Burkhart,                                                                        

112 F.3d at 1212; see  also Aguilar, 966 F.2d at 447  (expert                                               

                             -21-                                          21

legal opinion does not assist the factfinder under Rule 702).

This is because the judge's expert knowledge of the law makes

any   such  assistance  at  best  cumulative,  and  at  worst

prejudicial.  See Burkhart, 112 F.3d at 1213 ("Each courtroom                                      

comes equipped with a 'legal  expert,' called a judge, and it

is his  or her province  alone to  instruct the  jury on  the

relevant legal  standards."); 7  Wigmore on  Evidence    1952                                                                 

(Chadbourne rev.  1978) ("It is  not the common  knowledge of

the  jury which renders the witness' opinion unnecessary, but

the special legal knowledge of the judge.")

          Similarly, Fed. R. Evid. 704(a), which removes  the

common-law  bar  on  "otherwise  admissible"  testimony  that

"embraces an  ultimate issue  to be decided  by the  trier of

fact," does  not vitiate the  rule against expert  opinion on

questions of  law.  The  common law did  not allow an  expert

witness to inform  the jury of his or  her factual conclusion

concerning the "ultimate issue" in the case, because this was

thought to invade the province of the jury.  The abolition in

Rule 704(a) of  this "ultimate issue" rule allows  the expert

witness to  offer his or  her factual conclusion in  order to

aid the jury,  which properly can choose to  accept or reject

it.  However, questions of law are not "to be decided  by the

trier of fact";  rather it is for the  judge, not the lawyers

or the witnesses, to inform the jury of the law applicable in

                             -22-                                          22

the case and  to decide any purely legal  issue.11  Recently,

this court  has cautioned that  the abolition of the  "bar on

'ultimate issue' opinions  . . . is not  a carte blanche  for

experts." Dincov. Dylex,Ltd.,111 F.3d964,973 (1stCir.1997).12                                        

          While  the testimony  by  Santiago described  above

clearly transgressed the general rule, we acknowledge that it

is  often  difficult  to  draw  the  line  between  what  are

questions of  law, what are  questions of fact, and  what are

mixed questions.  See, e.g., In re Air Disaster at Lockerbie,                                                                         

Scotland on December  21, 1998, 37 F.3d 804,  826-27 (2d Cir.                                          

1994) (regarding  expert's testimony that  defendants engaged

in "fraud"  and "deceit"  admissible because  the terms  were

used  in layman's  sense, while  finding  expert's conclusion

                                                    

11.   For similar  reasons, the question  of whether  a legal
rule  has  been clearly  established,  in  the  context of  a
qualified immunity defense to a    1983 action, is a question
decided by the  court, not the jury.  See St. Hilaire v. City                                                                         
of Laconia, 71 F.3d 20, 24 (1st Cir. 1995).  Thus, the Eighth                      
Circuit  found  reversible  error in  allowing  a  witness to
espouse views concerning the  reasonableness of an  officer's
conduct in light of prevailing "Fourth  Amendment standards."
Peterson  v. City  of Plymouth,  60 F.3d  469, 475  (8th Cir.                                          
1995).   The jury's role  was only to  decide what facts were
known to the  officer at the time of the arrest, not whether,
in light of those facts, the officer's conduct was reasonable
under the applicable  legal standard and therefore  protected
by qualified immunity.  See id.                                             

12.  Santiago  was  competent  to  testify  that  plaintiffs'
appointments were  irregular in the  sense that they  did not
conform  to   normal  personnel   practice,  but   her  legal
conclusion that the appointments were in violation of the law
was improper.    Because  there  was  no  objection  to  such
conclusions,   our  review  is  for  plain  error,  a  burden
plaintiffs  cannot  sustain  in  light  of  our  harmlessness
analysis.

                             -23-                                          23

that  defendants  violated   FAA  regulations  inadmissible);

Specht,  853  F.2d  805,  809 (discussing  the  distinction).                  

Indeed, the definition of what is law and what is application

or  practice may  be difficult  to  ascertain.   This may  be

particularly so   when the issues involve not  only a statute

and formally  promulgated regulations,  but also  guidelines,

handbooks, advisory rulings,  interpretive bulletins, general

counsel's letter opinions, informational notices and  similar

accoutrements  of  the modern  bureaucratic state.   Further,

there   may  be  particular  areas  of  law,  such  as  legal

malpractice,  where  expert  testimony  on  legal  matters is

admissible where it would normally  be excluded.  We can also

hypothesize instances in rare,  highly complex and  technical

matters where a trial judge, utilizing limited and controlled

mechanisms, and as a matter of trial management, permits some

testimony seemingly at variance with the general rule.13  But

none of  those instances  are before us.   The  issues raised

here  are  routinely  before  the  federal  courts,  are  not

complex, and the use of such testimony was egregious.

Testimony Re After-Acquired Evidence                                                

                                                    

13.   Such  an instance  may be  patent litigation,  in which
technical experts  are generally  allowed to  comment on  the
scope  of a patent's  coverage and give  their conclusions on
the issue  of infringement.   See Snellman v. Rioch  Co., 862                                                                    
F.2d 283, 287 (Fed. Cir. 1988); Stearns Co. v. United States,                                                                        
324 Fed. Cl. 264, 268-69 (1995).  

                             -24-                                          24

          There  is   a  second   reason  the   admission  of

Santiago's testimony is very troubling.   That has to do with

application  of the after-acquired  evidence doctrine.14   In

McKennon  v. Nashville  Banner  Publ'g Co.,  115  S. Ct.  879                                                      

(1995),  the Supreme  Court considered whether  an employee's

wrongdoing, discovered after  the termination of  employment,

which would have been sufficient to justify the decision, but

which  was not  known  to the  employer at  the  time of  the

decision  and so  could  not  have  motivated  the  decision,

foreclosed a  claim of age  discrimination.  See id.  at 882.                                                               

The Supreme Court held that such evidence was not relevant to                                                             

the employer's liability for age discrimination, but would be

relevant in determining what remedy was appropriate.  See id.                                                                         

at  885.  If  the evidence would  have led  to the employee's

discharge  at some later date,  that would affect the measure

                                                    

14.    A question  may  be  raised  whether the  evidence  of
irregularities that Santiago  described meets the  definition
of after-acquired evidence under McKennon v. Nashville Banner                                                                         
Publ'g  Co.,  116 S.  Ct.  879  (1995).   McKennon  concerned                                                              
employee wrongdoing that would  normally cause termination of
employment.  We do not  know if the irregularities alleged in
this case would in fact  normally lead to termination or non-
renewal of  employment.    In  addition,  McKennon  expressly                                                              
considered  the  equitable  doctrine  of   unclean  hands  in
determining  that "the  employee's wrongdoing  must  be taken
into account,  lest  the employer's  legitimate  concerns  be
ignored."   Id. at 360.  Here, as the evidence was presented,                           
it  was   apparently  the  former   administration,  not  the
employees, who made the appointments allegedly against normal
procedures.   If  the  employees were  blameless,  it may  be
difficult to import  wholesale the McKennon doctrine.   Given                                                       
the desultory treatment  of this aspect of the McKennon issue                                                                   
by the parties and our disposition  of the case, we think  it
wiser to address the issue in some future case.

                             -25-                                          25

of  damages  and  the  appropriateness  of  reinstatement  as

equitable relief.  See id. at 885-86.  In Umbehr, the Supreme                                                            

Court adopted the McKennon approach in First Amendment claims                                      

brought by public employees or  contractors.  See Umbehr, 116                                                                    

S. Ct.  at 2352  ("[I]f [plaintiff]  prevails, evidence  that

[defendants] discovered  facts after  termination that  would

have  led  to  a  later  termination  anyway . . .  would  be

relevant in assessing what remedy is appropriate.").

          Thus,  such  after-acquired  evidence  is  normally

admissible  only as  to remedy,  and not  on liability.   Yet

here,  it was seemingly offered, over objection, as pertinent

to  liability.   Those  portions  of    Santiago's  testimony

concerning  the  irregularities in  plaintiffs'  appointments

which  did not  consist of  legal  conclusions were  arguably

relevant  to damages,  but normally,  not to  liability.   On

appeal, plaintiffs only argue the issue of admissibility, and

the evidence was arguably admissible on damages.15

          To   prevail,   plaintiffs  must   show   abuse  of

discretion  in  admission of  the  evidence.    Any abuse  of

discretion  analysis is  complicated by  the  actions of  the

                                                    

15.  The trial  court erred in  failing to instruct the  jury
that  Santiago's testimony  was not  relevant in  determining
liability.  Although  the judge properly instructed  the jury
that it should not consider  evidence that it did not believe
was before  the decision maker  at the time of  the decision,
the risk  of prejudice  was such that  the judge  should have
stated  explicitly   that  Santiago's   testimony  concerning
irregularities was  not to  be considered in  any way  on the
question of liability.

                             -26-                                          26

parties  here.    While much  of  Santiago's  testimony would

normally  be   inadmissible,  plaintiffs  may   have  invited

defendants to respond in kind.  It was apparently  plaintiffs

who first  introduced the  topic of  legal conclusions  to be

drawn  from review of plaintiffs' personnel  files and of the

law about rights of public employees.  Plaintiffs argued that

the files showed no disciplinary warnings or other actions by

the employers which  provided cause for termination  of their

employment,   and   their   expert   may  have   engaged   in

inappropriate legal commentary. Defendants apparently did not

object, perhaps because they wanted to respond in kind.

          The trial judge evidently felt that this opened the

door to  the defendants'  expert.  "Opening  the door"  is an

evidentiary concept  which requires  careful weighing  of the

unfairness of allowing one  party's objectionable evidence to

remain  unanswered  against  the  danger of  compounding  the

problem with further inadmissible and potentially prejudicial

testimony.  See 1 McCormack on Evidence   57 (John W. Strong,                                                   

ed.,  4th ed.  1992).   The  judge may  well  have felt  that

plaintiffs created the problem about which they now complain.

As plaintiffs did not provide this court with a transcript of

their own expert's testimony, we do not reach the question of

whether  the  judge   abused  his   discretion  in   allowing

Santiago's problematic testimony under an "opening  the door"

theory.

                             -27-                                          27

          To overcome the jury  verdict, plaintiffs must show

not only that there were errors under the abuse of discretion

standard,  but also  that the  district  court's errors  were

harmful.  "Only  if we answer both questions  in the positive

will [plaintiffs']  argument on  appeal prevail."   Ahern  v.                                                                     

Scholz, 85 F.3d 774, 786 (1st Cir. 1996).                  

Harmless Error                          

          In  a civil case,  the party asserting  error bears

the burden of demonstrating that the error was harmful, i.e.,

that it affected  that party's substantial rights.   See Fed.                                                                    

R. Civ. P.  61; Fed. R. Evid.  103; Federico v. Order  of St.                                                                         

Benedict  in R.I., 64  F.3d 1, 3  (1st Cir. 1995)  (burden of                             

showing harmful error  in a civil case is  on party asserting

error); Hygh v.  Jacobs, 961 F.2d 359, 364-65  (2d Cir. 1992)                                   

(holding  that objecting party had  not met burden of showing

that  admission  of  improper  legal  opinion  testimony  had

prejudicial  effect).    "In  determining  whether  an  error

affected a party's substantial right[s], the central question

is whether this court can  say with fair assurance . . . that

the  judgment was  not substantially  swayed  by the  error."

Ahern,  85 F.3d at  786 (citations, internal  quotation marks                 

and original alterations omitted).

          Factors  considered in  determining the  likelihood

that  the  jury's  verdict was  substantially  swayed  by the

evidentiary error include both the centrality of the evidence

                             -28-                                          28

and the  prejudicial effect  of its  inclusion or  exclusion.

See id.   "We weigh these  factors in the context of the case                   

as  gleaned from the  record as a whole."   Id. (citation and                                                           

internal quotation marks omitted).   Ultimately, if we are in

"grave doubt"  concerning the likely  effect of the  error on

the verdict,  we treat the  error as if  it had  affected the

verdict.  See id.                             

          Although normally  testimony such as  Santiago's as

to legal conclusions is  clearly wrong and such  testimony as

was proper  is limited,  at best, to  damages, we  cannot say

that the  testimony affected  the outcome  of the  trial, and

therefore, we consider it harmless.16 

          The  district court's  instructions here  reinforce

the  conclusion that Santiago's testimony was not central nor

did it  actually prejudice  the jury's  decision.  The  judge

properly  instructed  that  "once  a  transitory  appointment

expires, defendant  may  terminate  the  transitory  employee

. . .  for any  reason  except  if that  reason  is based  on                                                                         

political   affiliation."  (emphasis   added)     The   judge                                   

instructed,  not once  but several  times,  that the  central

issue  for the  jury to  decide  was whether  the motive  for

                                                    

16.  That plaintiffs  apparently  opened  the  door  to  such
testimony also bears  on the  harmless error  analysis.   The
jury may have had two  "experts" each opining on the law  and
may have disregarded  both experts as not helpful  on the key
question of motive.  In this case, the question of motive was
a straightforward  question of  whom the  jury believed,  the
Mayor or the plaintiffs.

                             -29-                                          29

plaintiffs'  non-renewals  was their  political  affiliation.

Finally, the verdict form itself  posed the question, "Do you

find by  a preponderance of the evidence  that the motivating

factor  for not renewing  the appointment of  [plaintiff] was

[his or her] political affiliation?"

          The judge did  expressly caution the jury  that the

municipal  defendants could not use compliance with state law

as  a pretext  for political  discrimination.   The  district

court instructed the jury that  they were not to consider any

facts that were not known  to the relevant decision makers at

the  time plaintiffs'  contracts were  allowed  to expire  in

deciding  whether  Soto's  administration  let plaintiffs  go

because  of their political  affiliation.17  As  the district

court explained, "if  the irregularity or misconduct  was not

discovered  until  after  the  employee's  contract  was  not

renewed,  the employer  could  not  have  been  motivated  by

knowledge of it, and he  cannot now claim that the employee's

contract was not renewed for that reason."

          Thus,  we do not find it likely, despite Santiago's

testimony, that  the jury  was confused  about the  rights of

                                                    

17.   In  finding  any  error harmless,  we  need not  decide
whether the  admission of the  evidence was erroneous  in the
first  instance.   Plaintiffs  themselves represented  to the
court that Soto's knowledge of the  illegalities was a viable
factual  issue  for  the  jury.    Plaintiffs  asked for  and
received  an instruction, which they said "would be curative"
of  the McKennon problem, that  the jury should disregard the                            
illegality evidence "if they believed that [the illegalities]
were discovered after the fact."  

                             -30-                                          30

transitory  employees under the First Amendment.  As in Caro,                                                                        

the  issue in  this  case  was "the  factual  matter of  [the

municipality's]  reason for dismissing  the plaintiffs.   Was

[its]  motive political?"   Caro,  878 F.2d at  2.   The jury                                            

answered that question.   As we harbor no  "grave doubt," the

judgment  of  the district  court  is  affirmed.    Costs  to                                                           

appellees.

                             -31-                                          31
