      Case 1:23-cv-00110-MV-KRS            Document 1        Filed 02/06/23      Page 1 of 5




                       IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                         FOR THE DISTRICT OF NEW MEXICO

KARINA PEREZ RUIZ,
JACKLYNN TRUJILLO,
DESTINEE TRUJILLO,
JOSE L. GALLEGOS,
VALERIA MARTINEZ, and
KARLA MARTINEZ

       Plaintiffs,

v.                                                           No. ______________________

WALTER APODACA and
UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE

       Defendants.

                          COMPLAINT FOR PERSONAL INJURY

       Plaintiffs, Karina Perez Ruiz, Jacklynn Trujillo, Destinee Trujillo, Jose L. Gallegos,

Valeria Martinez, and Karla Martinez (hereinafter “Plaintiffs”), by and through their counsel, The

Law Offices of Cameron & Russell, LLC (Bill Russell, Esq.), and for their Complaint for Personal

Injury state and allege as follows:

                                PARTIES AND JURISDICTION

1.     Plaintiff Karina Perez Ruiz is a resident of the City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County,

State of New Mexico.

2.     Plaintiff Jacklynn Trujillo is a resident of the City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, State

of New Mexico.

3.     Plaintiff Destinee Trujillo is a resident of the City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, State

of New Mexico.

4.     Plaintiff Jose L. Gallegos is a resident of the City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, State

of New Mexico.



                                                 1
      Case 1:23-cv-00110-MV-KRS              Document 1       Filed 02/06/23      Page 2 of 5




5.       Plaintiff Valeria Martinez is a resident of the City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, State

of New Mexico.

6.       Plaintiff Karla Martinez is a resident of the City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, State

of New Mexico.

7.       Defendant Walter Apodaca (hereinafter “Defendant Apodaca”) is a resident of the City of

Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, State of New Mexico.

8.       Defendant United States of America through the United States Postal Service (hereinafter

“USPS”) operates an office located at 1135 Broadway Blvd NE, Albuquerque, New Mexico

87101.

9.       This is a civil cause of action concerning a motor vehicle collision which occurred in the

City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, State of New Mexico.

10.      This Court is the proper venue for this matter to be heard, this Court has personal

jurisdiction over all parties involved, and this Court has subject matter jurisdiction regarding the

motor vehicle collision which forms the basis of Plaintiffs’ Complaint.

                  FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS COMMON TO ALL COUNTS

11.      On September 27, 2020, Plaintiffs’ vehicle (hereinafter Perez Ruiz’ vehicle) was traveling

eastbound on Bridge Blvd SW approaching the intersection in the City of Albuquerque, State of

New Mexico. All Plaintiffs were traveling inside the vehicle driven by Plaintiff Karina Perez Ruiz.

12.      On the date above in Paragraph 11, at the same time, Defendant Apodaca was traveling

northbound attempting to cross the intersection at Paulette Rd SW and Bridge Blvd SW failing to

keep a proper lookout Defendant broadsided Plaintiff’s vehicle.




                                                  2
      Case 1:23-cv-00110-MV-KRS             Document 1        Filed 02/06/23     Page 3 of 5




13.    Defendant Apodaca failed to abide by the rules of the road requiring him to check for

oncoming traffic. Defendant Apodaca additionally failed to avoid colliding with Plaintiff’s vehicle.

These negligent actions resulted in his vehicle colliding with Plaintiff’s vehicle.

14.    Due to Defendant Apodaca’s actions and failures to act, Plaintiffs sustained injuries and

damages.

                                   COUNT I – NEGLIGENCE
                                   (DEFENDANT APODACA)

15.    The allegations of the preceding and succeeding Paragraphs are incorporated herein by this

reference.

16.    At all times relevant, Defendant Apodaca had a duty of ordinary care in the operation of

his vehicle he was driving and for the safety of the Plaintiffs.

17.    Defendant Apodaca failed to exercise ordinary care in the operation of his vehicle and for

the safety of Plaintiffs and thus was negligent.

18.    As a direct and proximate result of the negligence of Defendant Apodaca’s, Plaintiffs have

suffered damages in the form of personal injury; pain and suffering; permanent injury; loss of

enjoyment of activities; hedonic damages, or loss of the value of life itself; reasonable expenses

for necessary medical care received in the past and reasonably certain to be received in the future;

property damage; nonmedical expenses required as a result of the injury and reasonably certain to

be required in the future; and damages in an amount to be determined by the Court at trial.

                         COUNT II – GOVERNMENTAL LIABILITY
                                   (DEFENDANT USPS)

19.    The allegations of the preceding and succeeding paragraphs are incorporated herein by

this reference.




                                                   3
      Case 1:23-cv-00110-MV-KRS             Document 1        Filed 02/06/23      Page 4 of 5




20.     As owner of Defendant Apodaca’s USPS vehicle, Defendant had duties of care to keep

government vehicles safe and suitable for its intended use and free of defects or dangerous

conditions of which Defendant knew or should have known would expose others to an

unreasonable risk of harm; and to carry on its activities and operations for the public’s safety.

21.     Defendant breached its duty keep reasonably safe vehicles by failing to operate and

maintain the USPS truck in a reasonably safe manner; by not properly instructing its employees

how the risks of the vehicle, knowing or should have known that employees would not realize or

be able to identify the risk.

22.     Defendant knew, or reasonably should have known, that injuries such as those suffered

by Plaintiff, were foreseeable and in fact likely, consequences of its careless and negligent

conduct.

23.     Defendant’s breaches of its duties in failing to remedy the design of its vehicles and the

properly instruct its employees was the actual and proximate cause of Plaintiffs’ injuries.

24.     As the direct and proximate result of Defendant’s conduct, Plaintiffs have suffered

damages for which they are entitled to recover.

                                             PRAYER

        Plaintiffs pray for judgment against Defendants in an amount adequate to compensate

Plaintiffs for the losses which have been suffered, for the costs of this action, for pre-judgment and

post-judgment interest, and for all other relief which is just and proper.

                                               Respectfully submitted,

                                               The Law Offices of Cameron & Russell

                                               /s/ Bill Russell __________
                                               Bill Russell
                                               500 Marquette Ave. NW, Ste. 1200
                                               Albuquerque, NM 87102



                                                  4
Case 1:23-cv-00110-MV-KRS   Document 1      Filed 02/06/23   Page 5 of 5




                             Telephone: (505) 218-7844
                             Facsimile: (505) 672-5128
                             bill@crlawnm.com

                             Attorney for Plaintiff




                                5
