       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 1 of 29




                            IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                 SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF TEXAS

JACOB THOMAS, and JTURBO              §
ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY,             §
LLC.                                  §
                                      §
Plaintiffs,                           §
                                      §
v.                                    §         CIVIL ACTION NO. ___________
                                      §
JOULE PROCESSING, LLC. and            §
PLUG POWER, INC.                      §
                                      §
Defendants                            §
                                      §
   __________________________________________________________________________

                      PLAINTIFFS’ ORIGINAL COMPLAINT
  __________________________________________________________________________

              Plaintiffs, JACOB THOMAS and JTURBO ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY, LLC,

  (collectively the “Plaintiffs”), file this Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint, to bring direct and

  derivative claims against Defendants, JOULE PROCESSING, LLC., and PLUG POWER, INC.

  (collectively, the “Defendants”) and would respectfully show as follows:

                                 I.   NATURE OF THE ACTION

         1.       This is a lawsuit involving the development of hydrogen liquefaction technology.

Specifically, the technology at issue can liquify hydrogen using significantly lower kilowatts

(kWH) per kilograms (kg) of liquid hydrogen, which is 50% lower than other liquefaction

technologies in operation or development. The method for such liquefaction, and more efficient

processes of liquefaction, was developed by Plaintiff Jacob Thomas (“Thomas”) and is owned by

Plaintiff JTurbo Engineering & Technology, LLC (“JTurbo”).

         2.       Although there is a United States patent obtained by Plaintiff, which is very

specialized and specific, the technology discussed in this Complaint are Mr. Thomas’ trade secrets




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                     Page 1 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 2 of 29




which he developed to increase energy efficiency in the liquefaction industry, and which are not

disclosed or claimed in the patent.

         3.       Defendants Joule Processing (“Joule”)          and Plug Power (“Plug”)              have

misappropriated that technology by using it without compensating Plaintiffs as agreed in the four

contracts between Plaintiffs and Defendants, a figure totaling around $11,200,000. Defendants

have thereby breached each of these contracts.

         4.       Defendant Plug is a successor in interest to Joule, as Plug acquired Joule and

assumed it contracts.

         5.       Jacob Thomas and JTurbo seek relief under the following federal question counts,

each of which are addressed in this Complaint:

              a. The D EFEND TRADE SECRETS A CT

         6.       Thomas and JTurbo also seek relief under Texas state law, specifically,

              a. The TEXAS UNIFORM TRADE SECRETS A CT;

              b. Breach of Contract;

              c. Tortious Interference of Prospective Business Relationship; and

              d. Unfair Competition.

                                 II.   JURISDICTION AND VENUE

         7.       This Court has original federal question jurisdiction over the subject matter of this

action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331 because Plaintiff has asserted a cause of action arising under

the laws of the United States, specifically 18 U.S.C. § 1836 (Defend Trade Secrets Act).

         8.       This Court also has supplemental jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1367 to hear

Plaintiffs’ other causes of action, all of which are so related that they form part of the same case

or controversy under Article III of the United States Constitution.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                         Page 2 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 3 of 29




         9.       This Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendant Joule as Defendant is in and

carries on its business in the State of Texas. Defendant Joule is headquartered in Harris County,

Texas within the Sothern District of Texas.

         10.      This Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendant Plug as it carries or carried on

its business in the State of Texas. Defendant has engaged with business with both JTurbo and

Joule, who are both Texas limited liability companies, and Plug has even purchased Joule which

maintains its principal place of business in Harris County, Texas within the Southern District of

Texas. Furthermore, all or a substantial portion of the events giving rise to this claim have occurred

or will continue to occur in the Southern District of Texas.

         11.      Venue in this Judicial District is proper under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b) and 18 U.S.C. §

1965(b) because this Complaint shows that the ends of justice require that other parties residing in

any other district be brought before this Court.


                                         III.   PARTIES

         12.      Plaintiff, Jacob Thomas (“Thomas”) is a citizen of the State of Texas and resides in

Fort Bend County, Texas.

         13.      JTurbo Engineering & Technology, LLC (“JTurbo”) is a limited liability company

duly organized under the laws of the State of Texas, is in good standing, and is domiciled in Fort

Bend County, Texas.

         14.      Defendant Joule Processing, LLC. (“Joule”) is a Texas limited liability company

doing business in Harris County, Texas and may be served through its registered agent, Bradley

W. Rapp, 1980 Post Oak Blvd., Suite 1200, Houston, Texas 77056, or wherever it may be found.

         15.      Defendant Plug Power, Inc. (“Plug”) is a corporation doing business in Latham,

NY and may be served through its registered agent, CT Corporation System, 1999 Bryan St., Suite




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 3 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 4 of 29




900, Dallas, Texas 75201, or at its office location of 968 Albany Shaker Road, Latham, NY 12110,

or wherever it may be found.

                                 IV.   FACTUAL BACKGROUND

         16.      JTurbo is a provider of process technology and consulting services in the energy

industry.

         17.      It is also a developer of hydrogen and liquefied natural gas (“LNG”) liquefaction

technology.

         18.      Jacob Thomas is the Founder and President of JTurbo Engineering and Technology,

LLC. Thomas developed hydrogen and liquefied natural gas liquefaction technology for JTurbo.

This would include the trade secrets and process simulations claimed in this complaint.

         19.      JTurbo, by assignment from Thomas, owned certain trade secrets, know how, and

improvements and enhancements to the technology and designs used to develop hydrogen

liquefaction plants (collectively “JTurbo H2L IP”). The JTurbo H2L IP technology trade secrets

also included process simulations, the different process data, and vendor lists.

         20.      This Complaint does not seek relief under Thomas’ patent, but seeks recovery on

those engineering technology, know how, selection of equipment packages relative to process

facilities generally, and the processes he developed for facilities, and sold through JTurbo, to

enhance production at liquefaction process facilities.

         21.      JTurbo’s patents are the mechanism and process that liquefies hydrogen gas.

However, JTurbo’s trade secrets, including the methods and deliverables, make the process of

liquefying hydrogen more efficient and less costly.

         22.      This is a general description of Thomas / JTurbo’s trade secrets.

         23.       Thomas charges his clients for his experience and consulting acumen, which

includes both his time and expenses. Joule, in turn, retained Thomas's consulting services.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 4 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 5 of 29




           24.    Joule Processing, a predecessor in interest to Plug, is an engineering, process

equipment and services, company that sought to enhance the efficiency of liquefaction processing.

           25.    JTurbo was contacted by Thomas’s old employer, Fluor Corporation (“Fluor”), to

contract with Joule for a Natural Gas Liquid (NGL) Recovery project (a cryogenic process that

removes natural gas from liquids).

           26.    Prior to JTurbo reaching out to Joule, Joule had virtually no experience in the

Cryogenic Liquefaction Technology industry.

           27.    On or about October 2020, Joule was attempting to develop a proposal for a

company called Navitas for a Natural Gas Liquid (NGL) Recovery project.

           28.     Because Joule lacked experienced engineers to perform and converge the process

simulation for the Navitas Project, they turned to Thomas, who had ample experience in cryogenic

processing.

           29.     To consult and promote their business prospects for NGL Recovery and Nitrogen

Rejection Unit project proposals, Joule actively retained Thomas's services.

           30.    On or about February 8, 2021, Joule requested JTurbo's help with a proposal to H2

Renewables in early February 2021. Although JTurbo prepared the proposal, they did not share

the process simulation. Instead, they only walked through it during production of the proposal.

           31.    Thomas developed the process simulations on Joule’s server for the H2 Renewables

to help Joule. However, the process simulations were under lock and key. Thomas had his own

user profile that was locked and protected from any other user from seeing the process simulations.

No other user was allowed access to Thomas’s unless the administrator override Thomas’s user

profile.

           32.    Then, on or about April 18, 2021, JTurbo began providing certain trade secrets,

know-how, process simulations, vendor selections, and contacts with their original equipment




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                      Page 5 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 6 of 29




manufacturer and research and development group on hydrogen liquefaction as part of an exclusive

package and provider agreement that advanced JTurbo’s and Joule’s mutual interests.

Additionally, prior to JTurbo providing those trade secrets and process simulations, Joule and

JTurbo entered into a non-disclosure agreement on or about April 1, 2021. See Exhibit 1. This was

because Joule and JTurbo anticipated entering an exclusive worldwide joint venture partnership to

exploit Thomas’ technology with Joule’s market contacts, a joint venture and collaboration that

would greatly benefit both parties.

         33.      After providing JTurbo’s trade secrets to Joule on or about April 2021, Joule

engaged Fluor, as a subject matter expert, to validate JTurbo’s H2L IP liquefaction technology.

         34.      Joule had neither the technological expertise nor experience to properly evaluate

Thomas and JTurbo’s simulation and determine if it would increase efficiency and costs of

proposed liquefaction units.

         The Original Exclusivity Agreement

         35.      After Fluor validated Thomas’ process, on or about April 29, 2021, JTurbo and

Joule entered into an Exclusivity Agreement for Joule to be the exclusive worldwide packager and

provider for JTurbo’s H2L IP technology. See Exhibit 2 (Original Exclusivity Agreement).

         36.      To induce Plaintiffs into signing the Exclusivity Agreement, Joule promised to

develop clients to license the JTurbo H2L IP technology and process simulations and that Plaintiffs

would be compensated for any hydrogen liquefaction plants that would use the JTurbo H2L IP

technology and process simulations.

         37.      Plug Power is a company engaged in the development of electrolysers and

hydrogen fuel cell systems that replace conventional batteries in equipment and vehicles powered

by electricity. Plug also had no experience in Cryogenic Liquefaction Technology.

         September 29, 2021 The Design Fee Agreement




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                      Page 6 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 7 of 29




         38.      On or about May 2021, Plug discussed with Joule and JTurbo its desire to develop

a Hydrogen Liquefier to complete their value chain. After discussions, Plug and JTurbo entered

into a non-disclosure agreement. See Exhibit 3. On or about September 29, 2021, JTurbo met with

Joule’s representatives, including Chuck Laughter. See Exhibit 4.

         39.      During the meeting Joule and JTurbo agreed that Joule would pay JTurbo a

Technology and Design Development Fee whereby JTurbo would receive $500,000 per unit using

the JTurbo H2L IP technology and process simulations and designs JTurbo created for Joule. See

Exhibit 4.




         40.      Pursuant to the Design Fee agreement, Joule was to pay JTurbo $500,000 for

developing a process design that would be similar to JTurbo’s H2L IP technology.

         41.      The Design Fee Agreement was to design both a 15 ton per day (tpd) and a 30 tpd

hydrogen liquefaction plant units, which would include JTurbo’s nitrogen pre-cooling cycle design

coupled with the process liquefaction cycle design. Unbeknownst to JTurbo, Plug had ordered

three units of hydrogen liquefaction plants from Joule on or around the time of this discussion.

         42.      Plug and Joule knowingly sought out JTurbo because of JTurbo’s innovative

hydrogen liquefaction technology that has a 50% lower specific energy consumption (SEC), which

is JTurbo’s H2L IP technology. However, JTurbo solely developed the process liquefaction cycle

design without any input from Plug or Joule.

         43.      Seeing the potential of JTurbo’s H2L IP liquefaction technology and process

designs, Plug engaged with Dr. Jacob Leachman, a well-known hydrogen expert from Washington

University and Atlas Copco R&D expander manufacturer to validate JTurbo’s hydrogen

liquefaction technology. See Exhibit 5.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                     Page 7 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 8 of 29




The Amended Restated Exclusivity Agreement

         44.      On or about January 10, 2022, JTurbo and Joule signed and executed an Amended

and Restated Exclusivity Agreement (“Amended Exclusivity Agreement”), which superseded the

Exclusivity Agreement executed on April 29, 2021. See Exhibit 6 (Amended Exclusivity

Agreement).

         45.      Around the time of the Amended Exclusivity Agreement, Plaintiffs and Defendants

all enter into Non-Disclosures Agreements (NDA) to protect the intellectual property rights and

trade secrets, know how, process simulations, and improvements and enhancements of the JTurbo

H2L IP technology from becoming known to the public. See Exhibit 3. Plaintiffs and Defendants

also executed NDAs with third parties that would be evaluating or wanting to know more about

the technology. See Exhibits 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13.

         46.      All the NDAs signed by Plaintiffs, Defendants, and third parties were all mutual

NDAs. The purpose of these NDAs was to protect both parties’ confidential information, which

includes proprietary information but also trade secrets, from being disclosed to the public.

         47.      Plug saw the potential of JTurbo’s H2L IP liquefaction technology. On or about

January 2022, Plug acquired Joule to use the JTurbo H2L IP technology. See Exhibit 14.

         48.      Joule was worth around $2 million to $5 million before JTurbo shared their trade

secrets, know-how, process simulations, designs, and vendor lists. Plug acquired Joule, who was

a small engineering company for around $190 million. This was primarily because of the JTurbo

H2L IP technology and process designs. Now Plug did not have to go through Joule to obtain the

JTurbo H2L IP technology and process designs.

         49.      When Plug bought Joule, Plug became successor in interest and assumed Joule’s

agreements with JTurbo, which are the Design Fee Agreement and the Amended Exclusivity

Agreement.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                      Page 8 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 9 of 29




         50.         JTurbo shared the JTurbo H2L IP technology, process simulations vendor lists, and

process designs with Defendants as part of their mutually beneficial business relationship for the

purpose of fulfilling their obligations under the Amended Exclusivity Agreement.

         51.         Defendants failed to compensate Plaintiffs per the terms of the Amended

Exclusivity Agreement. Joule agreed to license certain H2 liquefaction technology from JTurbo.

That technology was described in paragraph 2.a of the Amended Agreement as the “JTurbo H2L

IP”, attached as Exhibit 6 hereto. The provision included:

               a. Trade Secrets and know-how related to the JTurbo H2L IP as it existed on the

                     Effective Date;

               b. Improvements and enhancements made solely by JTurbo to the JTurbo H2L IP as

                     they existed on the Effective Date;

               and

               c. Any other protectible Intellectual Property obtained by JTurbo or its Affiliates in

                     the future alone or in collaboration with Joule.

         52.         The Amended Exclusivity Agreement provided that JTurbo would license the

JTurbo H2L IP to Joule, and that Joule, in turn would sublicense the JTurbo H2L IP to each client.

See Exhibit 6, paragraph 4. It provided for the possibility that JTurbo would provid e the process

engineering design services to Joule, who will then in turn provide it to potential clients.

         53.         JTurbo was supposed to be compensated for each Project, through (1) License Fees

and (2) the projects for which JTurbo provided the process engineering design services, called

“PDP Fees.” “Project” is defined in paragraph 1.h. of the Amended Exclusivity Agreement,

meaning a hydrogen liquefaction project using JTurbo H2L IP, which in turn, can also include

contemplated stand-alone liquefaction plant units.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                         Page 9 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 10 of 29




         54.      Fees were negotiated separately for each Project. JTurbo would negotiate its

licensing fee with Joule, and then Joule and JTurbo would jointly negotiate the sublicensing fee

directly with each customer. See Exhibit 6, paragraph 4.a. The license fees paid to JTurbo by Joule

were a condition of sale on each Project. JTurbo’s licensing fee on each Project was capped at 5%

of the Ex Works purchase price for each H2 liquefaction plant. 1 The parties defined this price as

the “H2L Equipment Price.” See Exhibit 6, paragraph 4.a. If JTurbo provided the process

engineering design services, its fees were to be commercially reasonable and capped at 1% of the

H2L Equipment Price.

         55.      Joule also promised in both the Original and Amended Exclusivity Agreement that

Joule would generate at least $5 million in gross revenue for JTurbo within 5 years. See Exhibit 6

(Paragraph 11.b). To date, the Amended Agreement has not been terminated.

         56.      On or about January 2023, Joule received three more orders of liquefaction plants

units using the JTurbo H2L IP from Nikola and TC Energy. Again, these orders were discussed

without JTurbo’s knowledge or compensation of the fees based on the Amended Exclusivity

Agreement.

         57.      It is known to JTurbo that the current process designs of the six hydrogen

liquefaction plant units are the same designs that JTurbo developed for Defendants. Which have

been confirmed by engineers working at Defendants and the vendors that were selected by JTurbo.

         58.      Upon information and belief, Defendants are working with the same vendors

JTurbo hand selected to produce the equipment used in JTurbo’s process simulations and designs.

JTurbo has been working with these vendors for eight years and all the vendors are under non-

disclosure agreements with JTurbo.




  1 “Ex Works” is an international trade term that describes when a seller makes        a product
  available at a designated location, and the buyer of the product must cover the transport costs.


Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                      Page 10 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 11 of 29




Confidential Information Shared with Joule in Confidence

         59.      JTurbo shared certain information – part of its trade secrets – in confidence, and

not available to the public to Joule as Joule and JTurbo signed a non-disclosure agreement on or

about April 1, 2021. See Exhibit 1. This was because of their belief that JTurbo and Joule were to

be exclusive worldwide joint venture partnership to package and provide the JTurbo H2L IP

technology and designs to the world.

         60.      JTurbo H2L IP technology is the first of its kind, using low energy and cost-

efficient technology to liquify hydrogen compared to all other hydrogen liquefaction technology

on the market today.

         61.      JTurbo’s hydrogen liquefaction simulation platforms, if utilized in facilities,

surpass all other similar liquefaction inventions in the market. JTurbo’s system can achieve 5.2

kilowatts hour per kilograms (kWh/KG) of hydrogen compared to the current state of the art

technologies available in the market which can only achieve 10-12 kWh/KG.

         62.      The advantage of JTurbo’s simulation was that it would look at a proposed

liquefaction platform and identify how costs and energy input could be reduced for the end user –

Joule’s client.

         63.      Once Thomas explained the general concept of what the JTurbo simulation could

provide to Joule’s clients, Joule was understandably motivated to work with Thomas and his

company, JTurbo to be an exclusive purveyor of its methods.

         64.      In a matter of a few weeks, JTurbo and Joule struck an accord about forming an

exclusive worldwide joint venture partnership to sell the process to end users who were looking at

building a liquefaction facility. Joule would sell the deal, then JTurbo would run its simulations,

based on what the end user (customer) wanted, to provide specifications for equipment, vendors




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                       Page 11 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 12 of 29




of product (expanders, for example), and optimal operating pressures for the end user’s proposed

facility.

         65.      As the terms of their exclusive worldwide joint venture were essentially finalized,

on or about February 8, 2022, JTurbo emailed Daniel Kennedy, the President of Joule, some of the

revised process simulations with the updated performance data. See Exhibit 15. The revised

process simulations contained Plaintiffs’ trade secrets. Defendants used the process simulations

and data that was developed by JTurbo, to advertise on Plug’s LinkedIn page as a provider of

hydrogen liquefactions. See Exhibit 16.

  January 10, 2022, Consulting Agreement Required Thomas’ Experience and Expertise

         66.      On or about January 10, 2022, Plug and Thomas executed a Consulting Agreement.

See Exhibit 17 (Consulting Agreement).

         67.      Thomas diligently worked with the parameters Plug provided him to continue

provide valuable feedback on what Plug was doing, all the while being surprised at the lack of

knowledge of their engineering team.

         68.      The scope of services under the Consulting Agreement was a distinctly separate

agreement with different scopes from the Amended Exclusivity and Design Fee Agreements.

         69.      Plug knew that they needed the expertise of Thomas to further develop process their

own hydrogen liquefaction plant units.

         70.      Specifically, the consulting services were related to the further development of the

implementation of the designs into their own hydrogen liquefaction plant units.

         71.      The Consulting Agreement provided that Plug would pay Thomas $300 per hour

for consulting services not to exceed 20 hours per week for a term of two years.

JTurbo Provided Enough to Satisfy Joule’s Every Need; But not its Greed




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 12 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 13 of 29




         72.      Notwithstanding the express terms of the Consulting Agreement, on or about June

2022, after obtaining critical information from Thomas, Plug reduced the consulting services to 10

hours per week, eventually terminating Thomas’ consulting services. See Exhibit 18. As of today,

Defendants owe Thomas approximately $400,000 on the Consulting Agreement, lost profits that

Thomas could have made had he worked through the term of the Consulting Agreement.

         73.      Upon information and belief, Joule saw a more profitable venture with Plug, and

sold itself and the secrecy it promised to JTurbo to Plug.

         74.      The technology that Joule, a small engineering company of about 20 people, turning

over a few million per year, was sold for several multiples of its topline to Plug.

         75.      The only technological asset Joule, and now Plug, had of import as US Energy

policy changes, is JTurbo’s trade secrets.

         76.      Joule and Plug knew that forcing Thomas out of the equation was the only way to

leverage his technology and squeeze him out.

         77.      Plaintiffs invested substantial time, expense, and effort into developing the JTurbo

H2L IP, including the trade secrets, know-how, process simulations, process designs, and

improvement and enhancements, only to have Defendants state it as their own. See Exhibit 16. The

video on the LinkedIn page even showed the process design JTurbo developed. See Exhibit 16.

         78.      Furthermore, Defendants have refused to pay JTurbo any fees for the use of

JTurbo’s H2L IP per the terms of the Amended Exclusivity Agreement or the $5 million that was

promised to JTurbo. Joule has also refused to pay JTurbo the Technology and Design Development

fee for the six units that were ordered from Joule.

         79.      The evil that was done to JTurbo and Thomas is that they were brought to the table

by Joule, and led to believe Joule could be trusted, when Joule with its conspirator, Plug, decided




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 13 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 14 of 29




to wreak havok on Thomas / JTurbo, taking that which Thomas has spent the better part of his life

developing.

         80.      This lawsuit is for recovery of compensation owed and recompense for Joule and

its conspirator’s betrayal.

                                      V.    CAUSES OF ACTION

Count 1: Violations of the Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016 (“DTSA”), 18 U.S.C. § 1836

         81.      Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Complaint as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).

         82.      Trade secrets, as defined under the Defend Trade Secrets Act, includes “all forms

and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering information,

including patterns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas, designs, prototypes, methods,

techniques, processes, procedures, programs, or codes, whether tangible or intangible, and whether

or   how       stored,    compiled,   or   memorialized   physically,    electronically,   graphically,

photographically, or in writing.” 18 U.S.C §1839(3). Two requirements must be met. First, the

owner of the trade secret must have taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret. 18

U.S.C §1839(3)(A). Second, the information itself must derive “independent economic value,

actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through

proper means by, another person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the

information.” 18 U.S.C §1839(3)(B). An owner of a trade secret that is misappropriated may bring

a civil action under the Defend Trade Secrets Act if the trade secret is related to a product or service

used in, or intended for use in, interstate or foreign commerce. 18 U.S.C. § 1836(b)(1).

         83.      Misappropriation means disclosure of use of a trade secret of another without

express or implied consent by a person who at the time of disclosure or use, knew or had reason

to know that the knowledge of the trade secret was acquired under circumstances giving rise to a




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                          Page 14 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 15 of 29




duty to maintain the secrecy of the trade secret or limit the use of the trade secret . 18 U.S.C. §

1836(5)(b)(ii)(II). Misappropriation also means acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person

who knows or has reason to know that the trade secret was acquired by improper means; or

disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without express or implied consent by a person who

used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade secret. 18 U.S.C §1839(5). Improper

means includes theft or breach of a duty to maintain secrecy. 18 U.S.C §1839(6).

         84.      JTurbo is the owner of trade secrets related to a product or services used in interstate

and foreign commerce. JTurbo’s trade secrets were composed of proprietary process design,

process simulations, know-how, and improvements and enhancements to its hydrogen liquefaction

technology developed by Thomas and which could be used for energy consumption. JTurbo’s trade

secrets also included its financial information, business operation methods, the identity of JTurbo’s

vendors and customers, and JTurbo’s pricing.

         85.      JTurbo derived independent economic value from its trade secrets not being

generally known or readily ascertainable by legal means. JTurbo’s hydrogen liquefaction system

surpasses all other similar liquefaction inventions in the market. JTurbo’s system can achieve 5.2

kilowatts hour per kilograms (kWh/KG) of hydrogen compared to the current state of the art

technologies available in the market which can only achieve 10-12 kWh/KG. As a capital cost

estimate, the JTurbo liquefaction cost is approximately $1,000 per KG whereas its nearest

competitor is at $2,500 per KG, which is 150% more than JTurbo’s costs. The economic value of

JTurbo’s trade secrets is evidenced by the six orders of hydrogen liquefaction plant units from

various business entities, including Plug, Nikola, and TC Energy.

         86.      JTurbo took steps that were reasonable under the circumstances to maintain the

secrecy of the trade secrets. The technology, design, operation methods, and process simulations

were known only to Joule and Plug, who agreed to not disclose to others the technical and business




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                            Page 15 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 16 of 29




information or to use that information to its own benefit. JTurbo also had a non-disclosure

agreement (NDA) with Joule, Plug, and many more third parties who would be evaluating the

JTurbo H2P IP technology. See Exhibits c. Furthermore, the confidentiality provisions of the

Amended Exclusivity Agreement and NDA show that JTurbo used reasonable measures to keep

the information a secret.

         87.      Defendants misappropriated the trade secrets by selling hydrogen liquefaction

plants incorporating JTurbo’s trade secrets, including the process simulations, process designs,

know-how, and improvements and enhancements, without discussing the fees with JTurbo or

compensating JTurbo for each sale of the units. Pursuant to the Design Fee Agreement, Defendants

were supposed to compensate Plaintiffs for use of the process design they created for Plug for the

development of hydrogen liquefaction plant units. Also, pursuant to Section 4 of the Amended

Exclusivity Agreement, Joule needed to license the JTurbo H2L IP from JTurbo for each project

and pay for the license. However, Joule and Plug sold the units without consulting JTurbo in the

dealings or paying them for the license/technology and design development fee.

         88.      Defendants further misappropriated JTurbo’s trade secrets by disclosing or using

the trade secrets, including the process simulations, process designs, without express or implied

consent of JTurbo when they knew they acquired under circumstances giving rise to a duty of

confidentiality or to limit use of the trade secret. Joule knew at the time they entered into the

Amended Exclusivity Agreement and NDA with JTurbo that there would be some information

that must be kept a secret.

         89.      Not only did Defendants sell these units, but they are also now marketing

technology utilizing JTurbo’s H2L IP, including process simulations, trade secrets, the process

designs, know-how, and improvements and enhancements, to other business entities furthering

their misappropriation.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                     Page 16 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 17 of 29




          90.     Defendants had the intent to convert the trade secrets, the process designs, know-

how, and improvements and enhancements, and knew the offense would injure the owner of the

of the trade secret.

          91.     The misappropriation was also willful and malicious because Joule and Plug Power

consciously disregarded the JTurbo’s trade secret rights. They knew that the information provided

by JTurbo was confidential pursuant to Section 4 in the Amended Exclusivity Agreement and

NDA but still engaged in transactions without compensating or licensing the JTurbo H2L IP from

JTurbo.


Count 2: Misappropriation of Trade Secrets Under the Texas Uniform Trade Secrets Act

          92.     Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Compliant as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).

          93.     The elements of a cause of action for trade secret misappropriation are (1) the

plaintiff owned a trade secret, (2) the defendant misappropriated the trade secret and (3) the

misappropriation caused injury. TEX. CIV. PRAC. & REM . CODE § 134A.002.

          94.     A trade secret is defined under the Texas Uniform Trade Secrets Act (“TUTSA”)

as “information, including a formula, pattern, compilation, program, device, method, technique,

process, financial data, or list of actual or potential customers or suppliers. TEX. CIV. PRAC. &

REM. CODE § 134A.002(6). A trade secret is further defined as “deriv[ing] independent economic

value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable

by proper means by, other persons who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or use.”

TEX. CIV. PRAC. & REM. CODE § 134A.002(6)(A). Finally, a trade secret must be “…the subject of

efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy.” TEX. CIV. PRAC. &

REM. CODE § 134A.002(6)(B).

          95.     JTurbo is the owner of trade secrets, process simulations, process designs, know-



Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 17 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 18 of 29




how, and improvements and enhancements, related to a product or services used in interstate and

foreign commerce. JTurbo’s trade secrets were composed of its proprietary hydrogen liquefaction

technology developed by Thomas, and which could be used for energy consumption. JTurbo’s

trade secrets also included its technology, process designs, know-how, and improvements and

enhancements, process simulations, financial information, business operation methods, the

identity of JTurbo’s vendors and customers, and JTurbo’s pricing.

         96.      JTurbo derived independent economic value from its trade secrets not being

generally known or readily ascertainable by legal means. JTurbo’s hydrogen liquefaction system

surpasses all other similar liquefaction inventions in the market. JTurbo’s system can achieve 5.2

kilowatts hour per kilograms (kWh/KG) of hydrogen compared to the current state of the art

technologies available in the market which can only achieve 10-12 kWh/KG. As a capital cost

estimate, the JTurbo liquefaction cost is approximately $1,000 per KG whereas its nearest

competitor is at $2,500 per KG, which is 150% more than JTurbo’s costs. The economic value of

JTurbo’s trade secrets is evidenced by the six orders of hydrogen liquefaction plant units from

various business entities, including Plug, Nikola, and TC Energy.

         97.      JTurbo took steps that were reasonable under the circumstances to maintain the

secrecy of the trade secrets, process simulations, the process designs, know-how, and

improvements and enhancements. The technology, design, operation methods, and financial

information were known only to Joule, who agreed to not disclose to others the technical and

business information or to use that information to its own benefit. JTurbo also had a non-disclosure

agreement (NDA) with Joule, Plug, and many more third parties who would be evaluating the

JTurbo H2P IP technology. See Exhibits 1, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13. Furthermore, the

confidentiality provisions of the Amended Exclusivity Agreement and NDA show that JTurbo

used reasonable measures to keep the information a secret.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                      Page 18 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 19 of 29




         98.      Defendants misappropriated JTurbo trade secrets, process simulations, the process

designs, know-how, improvements, and enhancements, in violation of their duty to maintain

secrecy and to limit use of the trade secrets. See TEX. CIV. PRAC. & REM. CODE ANN. § 134A.002(2),

(3). Pursuant to the Design Fee Agreement, Defendants were supposed to compensate Plaintiffs

for use of the process design they created for Plug for the development of hydrogen liquefaction

plant units. Also, pursuant to Section 4 of the Amended Exclusivity Agreement, Joule needed to

license the JTurbo H2L IP from JTurbo for each project and pay for the license. However, Joule

and Plug sold the units without consulting JTurbo in the dealings or paying them for the

license/technology and design development fee.

         99.      Defendants further misappropriated JTurbo’s trade secrets, process simulations, the

process designs, know-how, and improvements and enhancements, by disclosing or using the trade

secrets without express or implied consent of JTurbo. See TEX. CIV. PRAC. & REM. CODE ANN. §

134A.002(3)(B)(ii)(b).           Joule knew that it had an expressed and implied duty to maintain

confidentiality or limit the use of trade secrets. Joule knew at the time they entered into the

Amended Exclusivity Agreement and NDA with JTurbo that there would be some information

that must be kept a secret.

         100.     Not only did Defendants sell these units, but they are also now marketing

technology utilizing JTurbo’s H2L IP, including trade secrets, including the process simulations,

process designs, to other business entities furthering their misappropriation.

         101.     Defendants had the intent to convert the trade secrets, process simulations, the

process designs, know-how, and improvements and enhancements, and knew the offense would

injure the owner of the of the trade secret.

         102.     The misappropriation was also willful and malicious because Joule and Plug Power

consciously disregarded the JTurbo’s trade secret rights. They knew that the information provided




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                       Page 19 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 20 of 29




by JTurbo was confidential pursuant to Section 4 in the Amended Exclusivity Agreement and

NDA but still engaged in transactions without compensating or licensing the JTurbo H2L IP from

JTurbo.

Count 3: Breach of Contract of Amended & Restated Exclusivity Agreement in January 2022.

          103.    Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Complaint as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).

          104.    The elements of a cause of action for breach of contract are (1) a valid contract

exists, (2) the plaintiff performed or tendered performance as contractually required, (3) the

defendant breached the contract by failing to perform or tender performance as contractually

required, and (4) the plaintiff sustained damages due to the breach. Pathfinder Oil & Gas, Inc. v.

Great Western Drilling, Ltd., 574 S.W.3d 882, 890 (Tex. 2019).

          105.    The Amended Exclusivity Agreement is an amendment to a contract, as it was

signed and executed by both JTurbo and Joule Processing to amend the Original Exclusivity

Agreement. The Amended Exclusivity Agreement supersedes the Original Exclusivity Agreement.

          106.    The Amended Exclusivity Agreement obligated Plaintiffs to license their JTurbo

H2L IP to Joule, and in turn, Joule would sublicense JTurbo H2L IP to customers with the consent

of Plaintiffs. Plaintiffs performed under the contract as they were contractually required to because

Thomas had discussed and given Joule the JTurbo H2L IP technology and plant design.

          107.    However, Defendants have breached the contract by failing to perform their

obligations under the Amended Exclusivity Agreement. Defendants were obligated to include

Plaintiffs in the sale process of each Project that used the JTurbo H2L IP in the design, including

JTurbo’s trade secrets, process simulations, the process designs, know-how, and improvements

and enhancements.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 20 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 21 of 29




         108.     Defendants were also obligated to pay Plaintiffs a License Fee and PDP fee for

every Project that Joule would use JTurbo’s process engineering design services and JTurbo H2L

IP. Joule received six orders of liquefaction plants that used JTurbo H2L IP in the design, but

Plaintiffs were not involved in the discussions with the buyers or were paid a license fee.

         109.     Furthermore, Defendants have also breached the contract by not generating at least

$5 million in gross revenue for JTurbo, as stated in Paragraph 11.b. See Exhibit 6. Defendants

were obligated to generate at least $5 million in gross revenue in 5 years, which could include any

license or sale of JTurbo H2L IP, Process Design Package (PDP), and other revenue of any kind

or character. To date, Defendants have not generated any revenue for Plaintiffs. Instead,

Defendants have used Plaintiffs’ process simulations, the data in the process simulations, and

process designs, meaning Defendants have taken away revenue from Plaintiffs.

         110.     Plaintiffs sustained damages because they were not compensated based on the

license fees due to them for every unit sold using the JTurbo H2L IP in the design. Defendants

owed around $10,800,000 as lost revenue from the six hydrogen liquefaction units sold without

compensating Plaintiffs to use the JTurbo H2L IP technology, including its trade secrets, process

simulations, the process designs, know-how, and improvements and enhancements. Plaintiffs have

also sustained damages based on Defendants’ obligation to generate $5 million in gross revenue

in 5 years, which Defendants have shown no signs of performing.

         111.     Plaintiffs performed as contractually required. Defendants breached the contract by

failing to include Plaintiffs in the discussion with buyers and not being compensated on the

licensing fee. Plaintiffs have suffered damages because of Defendants’ breach.

  Count 4: Breach of Design Fee Agreement

         112.     Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Complaint as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 21 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 22 of 29




         113.     The elements of a cause of action for breach of contract are (1) a valid contract

exists, (2) the plaintiff performed or tendered performance as contractually required, (3) the

defendant breached the contract by failing to perform or tender performance as contractually

required, and (4) the plaintiff sustained damages due to the breach. Pathfinder Oil & Gas, Inc. v.

Great Western Drilling, Ltd., 574 S.W.3d 882, 890 (Tex. 2019).

         114.     Parties form a binding contract when the following elements are present: (1) an

offer, (2) an acceptance in strict compliance with the terms of the offer, (3) a meeting of the minds,

(4) each party's consent to the terms, and (5) execution and delivery of the contract with the intent

that it be mutual and binding. Levetz v. Sutton, 404 S.W.3d 798, 803 (Tex. App.—Dallas 2013,

pet. denied).

         115.     The Design Fee Agreement is a contract, as it was written and agreed upon by both

JTurbo and Plug. See Exhibit 4. The September 29, 2021, email states what was agreed upon in

the meeting with Joule and JTurbo on that day. In the email, it states “The agreed “H2L technology

development assistance fee” for JTurbo is $500k/unit ordered by Plug Power for up to the first

three units.” As the email states, the agreed upon terms were that there would be a Design Fee for

the process designs of $500,000 per unit.

         116.     The Design Fee Agreement obligated Joule to compensate JTurbo for the process

designs that JTurbo would grant to Defendants to help develop hydrogen liquefaction plants.

JTurbo performed under the contract when JTurbo handed over the process designs and process

simulations, including the data, to Defendants. Defendants breached the Design Fee Agreement as

a result of not compensating JTurbo for the designs that were provided to Defendants from JTurbo.

As to date, Plaintiffs have not received any compensation for their process designs.

         117.     Plaintiffs have sustained damages because they were not given compensation for

the process designs that were provided to Defendants to use to help develop hydrogen liquefaction




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 22 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 23 of 29




plants for Plug. Defendants owe around $10,800,000 as lost revenue from the six hydrogen

liquefaction plant units sold.

         118.     Plaintiffs performed as required by providing the process designs and process

simulations, including the data, to Defendants. Defendants breached the contract by failing to

compensate for the process that was developed by Plaintiffs. Plaintiffs have suffered damages as

a result of Defendants’ breach.

  Count 5: Consulting Agreement

         119.     Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Complaint as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).

         120.     The Consulting Agreement is a contract, as it was signed and executed by Plaintiff

Jacob Thomas and the VP of Strategy and M&A of Plug Power, Kevin Kopczynski.

         121.     The Consulting Agreement obligated Thomas to provide consulting services to

Plug at a rate of $300 per hour up to 20 hours a week. Thomas performed under the contract as

required by, as he provided consulting services related to the further development of and

implementation of the hydrogen liquefiers. Specifically, he participated in design reviews and

made reports to Plug for hydrogen liquefiers. Defendants breached the Consulting Agreement

because they did not fully compensate Thomas for his consulting services. As of to date, Plug has

only paid Thomas $200,000 under the terms of the Consulting Agreement. See Exhibit 19.

         122.     Thomas has sustained damages in the amount of $400,000 of lost profits if he were

to have performed until the end of the contract term.

         123.     Thomas performed as contractually required. Plug breached the contract by failing

to compensate Thomas what he is owned by Plug for his consulting services. Thomas has suffered

damage as a result of Plug’s breach.

Count 6: Tortious Interference with Prospective Business Relationships




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 23 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 24 of 29




         124.     Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Complaint as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).

         125.     The elements for tortious interference with prospective relations are (1) there was

a reasonable probability that the plaintiff would have entered into a business relationship with a

third person, (2) the defendant intentionally interfered with the relationship, (3) the defendant’s

conduct was independently tortious or unlawful, (4) the interference proximately caused the

plaintiff’s injury, and (5) the plaintiff suffered actual damage or loss. Coinmach Corp. v.

Aspenwood Apartment Corp., 417 S.W.3d 909, 923 (Tex. 2013).

         126.     There is a reasonable probability that JTurbo would have entered into a business

relationship with prospective businesses to sell its services. Defendants knew that if they did not

include Plaintiffs in the discussions of selling their units of liquefaction plants it would interfere

with Plaintiffs’ prospective clients or knew that their actions were certain or substantially certain

to cause interference.

         127.     Defendants have used Plaintiffs’ JTurbo H2P IP technology, including its trade

secrets, process simulations,       the process designs, know-how, and improvements and

enhancements, to obtain clients knowing that it would damage Plaintiffs. Plaintiff was damaged

every time Defendants would exclude Plaintiff in the sale of the liquefaction plants units without

compensating them for using the JTurbo H2P IP technology in the design.

Count 7: Unfair Competition

         128.     Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Complaint as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).

         129.     The elements of a cause of action for unfair competition by misappropriation are

(1) the creation of plaintiff's product (i.e., the trade secret information) through extensive time,

labor, skill, and money; (2) the defendant's use of that product in competition with the plaintiff,




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 24 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 25 of 29




thereby gaining a special advantage in that competition (i.e., a 'free ride') because defendant is

burdened with little or none of the expense incurred by the plaintiff; and (3) commercial damage

to the plaintiff." BP Automotive, L.P. v. RML Waxahachie Dodge, L.L.C., 448 S.W.3d 562, 572

(Tex. App.—Houston [1st Dist.] 2014, no pet.).

         130.     JTurbo developed the trade secrets, including process simulations, the process

designs, know-how, improvements, and enhancements. It took JTurbo years to develop the designs

and trade secrets, spending time and money to perfect the JTurbo H2L IP technology.

         131.     In Plug’s LinkedIn post, Plug portrays that they are the owners of the JTurbo’s

design and H2L IP technology. See Exhibit 16. Plug has been engaging in unfair competition and

unfair trade practices against JTurbo by marketing and advertising that they are the owners of the

JTurbo H2L IP technology and process simulations of hydrogen liquefiers with little to no expense

incurred in developing the technology.

         132.     Plug took JTurbo’s protected and secret information to undercut Plaintiff in the

Cryogenic Liquefaction market, causing commercial damage.

Count 8: Joule’s Breach of Fiduciary Duty

         133.     Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Complaint as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).

         134.     The elements of a cause of action for breach of fiduciary duty are (1) the plaintiff

and defendant had a fiduciary relationship, (2) the defendant breached its fiduciary duty to the

plaintiff, (3) the defendant’s breach resulted in (a) injury to the plaintiff, or (b) benefit to the

defendant. Burrow v. Arce, 997 S.W.2d 229, 237 (Tex. 1999). Partners owe certain fiduciary duties

to other partners within the partnership, such as the duty of loyalty and the duty of care. Johnson

v. Brewer & Pritchard, P.C., 73 S.W.3d 193, 199 (Tex. 2002); Nguyen, 507 S.W.3d at 379.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 25 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 26 of 29




         135.     Joule and JTurbo were exclusive partners to provide and package the JTurbo H2L

IP technology, process simulations and designs worldwide under the Amended Exclusivity

Agreement. In other words, the partnership was formed to exploit Thomas’ technology with

Joule’s market contacts. This joint venture and collaboration would greatly benefit both parties.

         136.     As exclusive partners, Joule had a fiduciary duty to not disclose JTurbo’s trade

secrets, process simulations, and designs. Joule knew that it had an expressed and implied duty to

maintain confidentiality or limit the use of trade secrets. Joule knew at the time they entered into

the Amended Exclusivity Agreement and NDA with JTurbo that there would be some information

that must be kept a secret.

         137.     JTurbo trusted Joule with JTurbo’s trade secrets, including process simulations,

process designs, know-how, improvements, and enhancements. This was on the belief that they

would be exclusive partners in the long run and each benefit from the partnership.

         138.     JTurbo entrusted Joule with negotiations and sales of the JTurbo H2L IP technology

and process simulations. Rather than represent JTurbo’s best interests, Joule put their best interests

first and breached their fiduciary duty to JTurbo to JTurbo’s detriment. Joule not only disclosed

JTurbo’s trade secrets to Plug, but Joule and Plug are now claiming that they are the owners of

those trade secrets, including the process simulations and process designs.

         139.     JTurbo justifiably placed its trust in Joule. Joule has breached that trust and the

fiduciary duty to JTurbo by failing to place JTurbo’s best interests before Joule’s own self-interest.

Accordingly, JTurbo sustained damages as a result of Joule’s breach of fiduciary duty to not

disclose JTurbo’s trade secrets. JTurbo seeks to recover in this suit, in an amount within the

jurisdictional limits of this Court.

         140.     JTurbo alleges herein that Defendant Joule knowingly or recklessly violated their

fiduciary duties by disclosing JTurbo’s trade secrets and claiming it as their own.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                        Page 26 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 27 of 29




Count 9: Plug’s Conspiracy to Commit Breach of Fiduciary Duty

         141.     Plaintiffs hereby adopt and re-allege each and every allegation previously set forth

in this Complaint as if fully set forth herein. FED. R. CIV. P. 10(c).

         142.     In Texas, a party who knowingly participates in another's breach of fiduciary duty

may be liable for the breach as a joint tort-feasor. See Kinzbach Tool Co. v. Corbett-Wallace Corp.,

138 Tex. 565, 160 S.W.2d 509, 514 (1942). Under Texas law, an actionable civil conspiracy occurs

when there is a "combination by two or more persons to accomplish an unlawful purpose or to

accomplish a lawful purpose by unlawful means." See Firestone Steel Prods. Co v. Barajas, 927

S.W.2d 608, 614 (Tex. 1996).

         143.     Joule and JTurbo were exclusive partners to provide and package the JTurbo H2L

IP technology, process simulations and designs to customers worldwide. When Plug acquired

Joule, Plug became a successor in interest. Meaning that Plug knew that Joule had a fiduciary duty

to not disclose JTurbo’s trade secrets, process simulations, and designs.

         144.     Plug conspired with Joule to obtain JTurbo’s trade secrets, process simulations, and

designs. Plug knowingly participated in Joule’s breach of fiduciary duty to JTurbo to not disclose

JTurbo’s trade secrets, process simulations, and process designs. Plug obtained those trade secrets,

process simulations and designs from Joule in order to not have to compensate JTurbo for them.

         145.     JTurbo sustained damages as a result of Plug’s acts to conspire with Joule to obtain

JTurbo’s trade secrets, process simulations, and process designs.

                                 VI.DAMAGES & ATTORNEYS’ FEES

         146.     Plaintiffs seek to recover their actual and consequential damages in this suit, in an

amount within the jurisdictional limits of this Court. Plaintiffs seek exemplary damages against

Defendants as Defendants’ actions were committed with malice as defined by Chapter 41 of the

Texas Civil Practice & Remedies Code.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                         Page 27 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 28 of 29




         147.     Plaintiffs are entitled to reasonable attorney’s fees under 18 U.S.C. § 1836(b)(3)(D)

(Defend Trade Secrets Act) and TEX. CIV. PRAC. & REM CODE ANN. § 134A.005 (Texas Uniform

Trade Secrets Act).

         148.     Plaintiffs are entitled to an award of attorney’s fees under 18 U.S.C. §

1836(b)(3)(D) and TEX. CIV. PRAC. & REM CODE ANN. § 134A.005 as Plaintiffs have shown that

the misappropriation was made in bad faith and the trade secret was willfully and maliciously

misappropriated. As a result of Defendants’ conduct, Plaintiffs were forced to retain the

undersigned counsel to pursue these causes of action.

         149.     Plaintiffs seek to recover their reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs, along with pre-

judgment and post-judgment interest, under the provisions of Chapter 38 of the Texas Civil

Practice & Remedies Code or as otherwise allowed by law.

                                          VII. JURY DEMAND

         150.     Plaintiffs respectfully demand the right to have a trial by jury and hereby tender the

appropriate jury fee to the district Clerk of Court for the U.S. District Court for the Western District

of Texas.

                                             VIII. PRAYER

         151.     For these reasons, Plaintiffs ask that the Court issue citation for Defendants to

appear and answer, and that Plaintiffs be awarded judgment against Defendants for the following:

                  1. Actual, consequential and exemplary damages, as allowed by law;

                  2. Pre-judgment and post-judgment interest;

                  3. Reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of court;

                  4. All other relief to which Plaintiffs may show themselves to be entitled to, in law
                     or in equity.




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                                          Page 28 of 29
       Case 1:23-cv-01528-AMN-CFH Document 1 Filed 05/02/23 Page 29 of 29




                                          Respectfully submitted,

                                          THE VETHAN LAW FIRM , PC

                                          By: /s/ Charles M. R. Vethan
                                          Charles M. R. Vethan
                                          Attorney-in-Charge
                                          Texas Bar No. 00791852
                                          Joseph L. Lanza
                                          Texas Bar No. 00784447
                                          Two Memorial City Plaza
                                          820 Gessner, Suite 1510
                                          Houston, Texas 77024
                                          Tel: (713) 526-2222
                                          Fax: (713) 526-2230
                                          Email: edocs@vwtexlaw.com

                                          Attorneys for Plaintiffs




Plaintiffs’ Original Complaint                                       Page 29 of 29
