          Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 1 of 12




ERIN C. DYER, ISB #10700
CRAIG SWAPP & ASSOCIATES
16201 East Indiana Avenue, Suite 1900
Spokane Valley, WA 99216
Telephone: (509) 252-5037
Facsimile: (509) 252-5038
E-mail: erin.dyer@craigswapp.com

HUMBERTO M. GUIZAR, ESQ.,
CHRISTIAN CONTRERAS, ESQ
THE LAW OFFICES OF HUMBERTO GUIZAR
A PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION
3500 W. Beverly Blvd.,
Montebello, California 90640
Telephone: (323) 725-1151
Facsimile: (323) 597-0101
E-mail: hguizar@ghclegal.com
E-mail: cc@Contreras-Law.com
(seeking admission Pro Hac Vice)

Attorneys for Plaintiff, MELISSA WALTON


                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                 DISTRICT OF IDAHO

 MELISSA WALTON, individually and as
                                                  Case No. 1:23-cv-00478-CWD
 successor in interest to ZACHARY SNOW,

                              PLAINTIFF,
                                                 AMENDED COMPLAINT FOR
    vs.
                                                 DAMAGES
  CITY OF BOISE; OFFICER M. JACOBS;
                                                 DEMAND FOR JURY TRIAL
  OFFICER C. SNODDERLY; and DOES 1-
  10

                           DEFENDANTS.



                                    INTRODUCTION

      1.      This is a wrongful death lawsuit stemming from the shooting death of ZACHARY
SNOW on October 27, 2021 in Downtown Boise, Idaho by Boise Police Department Officers M.
JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY.
         Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 2 of 12




                                   JURISDICTION & VENUE
       2.      This action is brought pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §§ 1983 and 1988, and the Fourth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, and the laws and Constitution of the
State of Idaho. Jurisdiction is conferred upon this Court by 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 1343.
       3.      Venue is proper within the Idaho District pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(1) and
(2) because all Defendants reside within this district and the events and omissions giving rise to
Plaintiffs’ claims occurred within this district.
                                              PARTIES
       4.      Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON was the mother of ZACHARY SNOW and brings
this lawsuit individually and as successor in interest to ZACHARY SNOW.
       5.      Defendant CITY OF BOISE (hereinafter sometimes “CITY”) is municipal entity
of the State of Idaho with the capacity to sue and be sued. Defendant CITY is responsible for the
actions, omissions, policies, procedures, practices and customs of its officers, and its agents and
employees. At all times relevant to the facts alleged herein, Defendant COUNTY was responsible
for the acts and omission of Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY.
       6.      Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and Does 1 Through 10 were
employees of the CITY. At all times relevant, Defendants . JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and
Does 1 Through 10 were an employee and/or agent of Defendant CITY and each of these
individual defendants acted under color of law, to wit, under the color of the statutes, ordinances,
regulations, policies, customs, and usages of Defendant CITY, as well as under the color of the
statutes and regulations of the State of Idaho.
       7.      The true names of defendants Does 1 Through 10, inclusive, are unknown to
Plaintiff, who therefore sues these defendants by such fictitious names. Plaintiff will seek leave to
amend this complaint to show the true names and capacities of these defendants when they have
been ascertained. Each of the fictitious named defendants is responsible in some manner for the
conduct and liabilities alleged herein.
       8.      At all times relevant to the facts alleged herein, Defendants M. JACOBS and C.
SNODDERLY, and Does 1 Through 10, are duly appointed, qualified and acting officers,
employees, and/or agents of CITY, employed as such by Defendants, and acting within the course
and scope of their employment and/or agency and under color of state law. Each of the Defendants
            Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 3 of 12




and Doe Defendants caused and is responsible for the unlawful conduct and resulting by, inter alia,
personally participating in the conduct, or acting jointly and in concert with others who did so by
authorizing, acquiescing, condoning, acting, omitting or failing to take action to prevent the
unlawful conduct by promulgating or failing to promulgate policies and procedures pursuant to
which the unlawful conduct occurred; by failing and refusing, with deliberate indifference to
Plaintiff’s rights, to initiate and maintain adequate supervision, security, training, compliance with
responsibilities and duties, and staffing; by failing to maintain proper and adequate policies,
procedures and protocols; and by ratifying and condoning the unlawful conduct performed by
agents and officers, deputies, and employees under their direction and control.
        9.      Each of the Defendants caused and is responsible for the unlawful conduct and
resulting, by, inter alia, personally participating in the conduct, or acting jointly and in concert
with others who did so; by authorizing, acquiescing or failing to take action to prevent the unlawful
conduct; by promulgating policies and procedures pursuant to which the unlawful conduct
occurred; by failing and refusing, with deliberate indifference to Plaintiff’s rights, to initiate and
maintain adequate supervision and/or training; and, by ratifying the unlawful conduct that occurred
by agents and peace officers under their direction and control. Whenever and wherever reference
is made in this Complaint to any act by a Defendant, such allegation and reference shall also be
deemed to mean the acts and failures to act of each Defendant individually, joint, and severally.
They are sued in their individual and official capacities and in some manner are responsible for
the acts and omissions alleged herein. Plaintiff will ask leave of this Court to amend this Complaint
to allege such name and responsibility when that information is ascertained. Each of Defendants
is the agent of the other and the actions of each of the Defendants were ratified by the other
Defendants.
        10.     Whenever and wherever reference is made in this Complaint to any act by
Defendants and Doe Defendants, such allegations and references shall also be deemed to mean the
acts and failures to act of each Defendants individually, jointly or severally
                                  GENERAL ALLEGATIONS
        11.     On October 27, 2021, Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON called the police to tell them
her son, ZACHARY SNOW, was struggling and suicidal. ZACHARY SNOW’s ex-girlfriend
contacted Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON and said he was hurting after they separated and he was
suicidal.
           Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 4 of 12




          12.   Since Decedent ZACHARY SNOW was young, he battled mental illness.
          13.   Indeed, doctors diagnosed ZACHARY SNOW with anti-social personality disorder
at the age 18. ZACHARY SNOW was prescribed medication as a result.
          14.   The Boise Police Department said officers knew about ZACHARY SNOW’s
record and had dealt with him in the past.
          15.   October 27, 2021, knowing of ZACHARY SNOW’s mental health issues and
encounters in the past, Boise Police Department officers received a call from MELISSA
WALTON about ZACHARY SNOW being suicidal.
          16.   They came in contact with him again the evening of October 27, 2021 after Walton
called dispatch, saying her son threatened to take his own life.
          17.   Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON had a video of ZACHARY SNOW standing on top
of a building saying goodbye. Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON told SNOW that she was calling the
police.
          18.   Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON told police, dispatch around 5 p.m. on October 27,
2021 that ZACHARY SNOW was on top of a building in downtown Boise.
          19.   Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON spoke with ZACHARY SNOW after calling police
and said, ‘Hey bud, I called police. They’re looking for you. Go talk to them, they’re going to help
you.’”
          20.   Thereafter, Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON spoke with a BOISE police officer and
explained that her son was depressed, off his meds and he was unarmed.
          21.   Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does 1-10, inclusive,
subsequently located ZACHARY SNOW near the intersection of Capitol Boulevard and Myrtle
Street.
          22.   When Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does 1-10, inclusive,
located ZACHARY SNOW, SNOW was in an empty lot not committing a crime, not harming
anyone, not threatening to harm anyone, nor doing anything which caused the officers to
reasonably believe that SNOW was a threat to the officers or a member of the public.
          23.   In fact, ZACHARY SNOW was not armed with a weapon when Defendants M.
JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does 1-10, inclusive, located him and the officers were also
advised by Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON that SNOW was unarmed.
           Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 5 of 12




         24.   Instead of establishing a perimeter or having a tactical plan as to how to approach
SNOW, Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does 1-10, inclusive, rushed into the
situation contrary to their training and contrary to standard police practices.
         25.   When Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does 1-10, inclusive,
rushed to attack SNOW, there was no exigent circumstance nor any other reasonable reason to
rush in.
         26.   Time was on the side of Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does
1-10, inclusive.
         27.   As Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does 1-10, inclusive,
rushed SNOW, SNOW does not immediately submit to the officers.
         28.   Instead of showing a reverence to the human life of SNOW, Defendants M.
JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY opened fire on SNOW and kill SNOW.
         29.   Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY shot ZACHARY SNOW several
times.
         30.   Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY shot and killed a man who was
experiencing a mental health crisis in violation of their training and in violation of SNOW’s right
to be free from unreasonable seizures.
                                  FIRST CLAIM FOR RELIEF
                            EXCESSIVE FORCE IN VIOLATION
                              OF THE FOURTH AMENDMENT
                                         (42 U.S.C. § 1983)
(Plaintiff, as successor in interest, Against Defendants OFFICER M. JACOBS; OFFICER
                               C. SNODDERLY; and DOES 1-10)
         31.   Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges each allegation in all the preceding paragraphs of
this Complaint with same force and effect as if fully set forth herein.
         32.   Under the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution, ZACHARY
SNOW had a right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures.
         33.   Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY used excessive force against
SNOW by unnecessarily and unreasonably shooting him, while acting under color of law, and in
clear and well-established violation of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
         Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 6 of 12




       34.     Clearly, Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY violated SNOW’s Fourth
Amendment rights when they used his firearm, deadly force, in a reckless way, and with willful
and conscious disregard, when they shot SNOW, a young man who posed no threat of harm to
Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does 1-10, inclusive, at the time he was shot.
Such use of deadly force by Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY, and Does 1-10,
inclusive was clearly unreasonable, not warranted under the totality of the circumstances, and lead
to the shooting and killing of SNOW.
       35.     Under the same or similar circumstances, no reasonable officer would have used
force of the manner and to the extent as that used by Defendants against SNOW. SNOW was not
an imminent threat of death or serious bodily injury to any officers or anyone else.
       36.     Accordingly, MELISSA WALTON, as successors-in-interest to SNOW, claims
damages under 42 U.S.C. § 1988 for SNOW’s loss of value of life, pre-death human suffering, and
all attorneys’ fees and costs yet incurred and yet to be incurred by MELISSA WALTON in
presenting, maintaining, and prosecuting this action, under 42 U.S.C. § 1988.
       37.     Further, the conduct of Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and DOES
1-10, inclusive, willful, and conscious disregard of SNOW’s rights and safety subjected him to
cruel and unjust hardship in the moments leading up to and including his death. Therefore,
Defendants’ conduct also amounted to a malicious and/or oppressive for which MELISSA
WALTON is further entitled to recover punitive damages.
                                SECOND CLAIM FOR RELIEF
        FOR VIOLATION OF FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT (DUE PROCESS) -
                   INTERFERENCE WITH FAMILIAL RELATIONSHIP
                                        (42 U.S.C. § 1983)
     (Plaintiff, individually, Against Defendants OFFICER M. JACOBS; OFFICER C.
                                SNODDERLY; and DOES 1-10)
       38.     Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges each allegation in all the preceding paragraphs of
this Complaint with same force and effect as if fully set forth herein.
       39.     The Substantive Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United
States Constitution guarantees all persons the right to be free from unreasonable state interference
in their familial relations. Indeed, Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON, individually, has a cognizable
interest under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States
         Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 7 of 12




Constitution to be free from state actions that would deprive them of life, liberty, or property
including the right of familial relationship in such a manner as to shock the conscience by being
deliberately indifferent to the constitutional rights of Plaintiff or by committing such violation with
a purpose to harm unrelated to any legitimate law enforcement objective.
       40.     As described in the previous claim for relief, the shooting and killing of SNOW
was objectively unreasonable under the circumstances of his encounter with Defendants M.
JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and DOES 1-10, inclusive, and in violation of constitutional
limits on use of deadly force by police. Therefore, Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY
and DOES 1-10, inclusive, acted with deliberate indifference to the rights, safety, and wellbeing
of Decedent SNOW and his family, or, acted with a purpose to harm unrelated to any legitimate
law enforcement objective when they shot SNOW multiple times, causing his death.
       41.     Due directly to the Defendants’ conduct which shocks the conscience, SNOW was
shot and killed during a mental health crisis and was unarmed. Accordingly, Defendants, and each
of them, directly and proximately caused SNOW’s death. Additionally, SNOW was caused to
needlessly suffer severe physical, psychological, and emotional pain and suffering in the moments
leading up to his death, for which his MELISSA WALTON is entitled to recover damages.
       42.     Therefore, the shooting and killing of SNOW by Defendants M. JACOBS and C.
SNODDERLY and DOES 1-10, inclusive, shocks the conscience and has destroyed his familial
relationship between Plaintiff MELISSA WALTON and SNOW further causing Plaintiff to
permanently suffer the loss of his companionship, society, and material and moral support. The
shooting and killing of SNOW by Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and DOES 1-
10, inclusive, violated the rights of Plaintiff to be free from unreasonable state interference in their
relationship with SNOW, who was MELISSA WALTON’s son.
       43.     Accordingly, MELISSA WALTON, as successors-in-interest to SNOW, claims
damages under 42 U.S.C. § 1988 for SNOW’s loss of value of life, pre-death human suffering, and
all attorneys’ fees and costs yet incurred and yet to be incurred by MELISSA WALTON in
presenting, maintaining, and prosecuting this action, under 42 U.S.C. § 1988.
       44.     Further, the conduct of Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and DOES
1-10, inclusive, willful, and conscious disregard of SNOW’s rights and safety subjected him to
cruel and unjust hardship in the moments leading up to and including his death. Therefore,
         Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 8 of 12




Defendants’ conduct also amounted to a malicious and/or oppressive for which MELISSA
WALTON is further entitled to recover punitive damages.
///
                                  THIRD CLAIM FOR RELIEF
 FOR MUNICIPAL LIABILITY - UNCONSTITUTIONAL POLICIES, CUSTOMS, AND
                                           PRACTICES
                                         (42 U.S.C. § 1983)
        (Plaintiff, as successor in interest, Against Defendants CITY and DOES 1-10)
        45.     Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges each allegation in all the preceding paragraphs of
this Complaint with same force and effect as if fully set forth herein.
        46.     The present cause of action is brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, Monell v. Dept. of
Social Services, and all other relevant case law and precedent, under which Defendant CITY is
liable by way of the policies, customs, or directives that were substantial moving forces behind
Plaintiff’s constitutional violations.
        47.     At all relevant times, Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and DOES
1-10, inclusive were acting in the course of their employment with the Defendant CITY, under
color of law. The actions and omissions of Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and
DOES 1-10, inclusive of particular rights guaranteed under the laws and Constitutions of the
United States and Idaho, as set forth in the relevant claims for relief herein.
        48.     Defendant CITY was and at all times herein mentioned has been a public entity and
incorporated municipality duly authorized and existing as such in and under the laws of the State
of Idaho. Defendant CITY, and its police department, possessed the power and authority to adopt
policies and prescribe rules, regulations and practices affecting the operation of the CITY and its
tactics, methods, practices, customs and usages related to internal investigations, personnel
supervision and records maintenance and the proper application of their powers of arrest by its
rank and file, generally.
        49.     At all times herein mentioned, Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and
DOES 1-10, inclusive, were employees of the CITY acting under the CITY’s direction and control,
who knowingly and intentionally promulgated, maintained, applied, enforced and suffered the
continuation of policies, customs, practices and usages in violation of the Fourth and Fourteenth
Amendments respectively to the United States Constitution, which customs, policies, practices and
         Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 9 of 12




usages at all times herein mentioned encouraged the employment, deployment and retention of
persons as peace officers who have a propensity for failing to protect citizens in custody, failing
to provide safe conditions of confinement, dishonesty, cover-up, bias, and numerous other serious
abuses of their duties as peace officers in the employment of the CITY.
       50.     On and for some time prior to October 27, 2021 (and continuing to the present date),
Defendant CITY and its police department, acting with deliberate indifference to the rights and
liberties of the public in general, and of Plaintiffs, and of persons in Decedent SNOW’s class,
situation, and comparable position, knowingly maintained, enforced, and/or adopted policies,
customs, and/or practices of:
   A. Encouraging, accommodating, or ratifying conduct of officers such as Defendants M.
       JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and DOES 1-10, inclusive in failing to contact individuals,
       such as SNOW, in the proper manner during a mental health crisis;
   B. Encouraging, accommodating, or ratifying shooting of individuals who are unarmed, or the
       like, despite such individuals not presenting a threat of death or serious bodily injury;
   C. Encouraging, accommodating, or ratifying shooting of individuals after a perceived threat
       has been neutralized;
   D. Encouraging, accommodating, or ratifying the shooting of residents as a first resort, instead
       of using less than lethal force options;
   E. Encouraging, accommodating, or ratifying the use of excessive and unreasonable force,
       including deadly force instead of using less than lethal force options;
   F. Encouraging, accommodating, or facilitating a “code of silence” among Boise Police
       Department officers/supervisors, pursuant to which false reports are generated, and
       excessive and unreasonable uses force are covered up or overlooked;
   G. Inadequately supervising, training, and disciplining Boise Police Department police
       officers, including Defendants M. JACOBS and C. SNODDERLY and DOES 1-10,
       inclusive;
   H. Maintaining grossly inadequate procedures for reporting, supervising, investigating,
       reviewing, disciplining, and controlling misconduct by Boise Police Department officers;
       51.     By reason of the forgoing policies, customs, and practices, Plaintiff SNOW were
subjected to severe physical, psychological, and emotional pain and suffering, as outlined in the
claims for relief alleged herein.
         Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 10 of 12




       52.        Plaintiffs are informed and believe and thereon allege that at the time of the
aforementioned shooting, and long prior thereto, the CITY, and other supervisory officers thereof,
as yet unknown to Plaintiff, failed to properly train, instruct, supervise, investigate, regulate, or
discipline Defendants DOES 1-10, inclusive, and each of them. These failures and the
aforementioned practices, policies, and customs were the substantial moving forces behind the
harm and death of Plaintiff and Decedent, respectively. Clearly, the policies, practices, and
customs implemented, maintained, and/or still tolerated by Defendants CITY were affirmatively
linked to and were substantial moving forces behind the injuries of Plaintiffs and Decedent.
       53.        As such, these expressly adopted official policies or widespread, well-known, and
longstanding practices or customs constitute standard operating procedures of the defendants
CITY, which has resulted in repeated incidents of officer involved shootings and excessive force,
against members of the general public. The aforesaid acts and omissions of Defendants were done
knowingly, intentionally, depriving Plaintiffs and Decedent of their constitutional rights.
       54.        Defendants CITY, along with various other officials, whether named or unnamed,
had either actual or constructive knowledge of the deficient policies, practices, and customs alleged
in the paragraphs above. Despite this knowledge, these Defendants condoned, tolerated, and
through their actions and inactions did ratify such customs and practices. Defendants also acted
with deliberate indifference to the foreseeable effects and consequences of these policies with
respect to the constitutional rights of Plaintiffs, Decedent, and other individuals similarly situated.
       55.        Accordingly, Defendants CITY are liable to the respective Plaintiffs as set forth in
the causes of action under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 herein.

                                        PRAYER FOR RELIEF

       WHEREFORE, Plaintiff requests entry of judgment in her favor and against Defendants

as follows:

       A. For compensatory damages, for wrongful death including damages for the loss of

              Decedent’s life-long love, companionship, comfort, care, assistance, protection,

              affection, society; moral support; and the loss of relationship with Decedent, including

              loss of society, familial relationship and companionship in an amount according to

              proof at the time of trial;
       Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 11 of 12




      B. For compensatory damages, for survival damages for the mental, physical and

          emotional pain and suffering of Decedent in an amount according to proof at the time

          of trial;

      C. For loss of financial support, sustenance and earning capacity in an amount according

          to proof at the time of trial;

      D. For loss of gifts and benefits in an amount according to proof at the time of trial;

      E. For Decedent’s own pre-death human suffering;

      F. For Decedent’s own loss of value of life;

      G. For punitive damages against the individual defendants in an amount to be proven at

          trial;

      H. For reasonable costs of this suit and attorneys' fees, including pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §

          1988;

      I. For such further other relief as the Court may deem just, proper, and appropriate.

Dated: October 31, 2023               CRAIG SWAPP & ASSOCIATES


                                             /s/Erin C. Dyer
                                             ERIN C. DYER
                                             Attorney for Plaintiff

                                      LAW OFFICES OF HUMBERTO GUIZAR, APC


                                       By:   /s/Humberto Guizar
                                             HUMBERTO GUIZAR
                                             CHRISTIAN CONTRERAS
                                             Attorney for Plaintiff



                                 DEMAND FOR JURY TRIAL


      Plaintiff hereby demands a trial by jury.
       Case 1:23-cv-00478-CWD Document 3 Filed 10/31/23 Page 12 of 12




Dated: October 31, 2023      CRAIG SWAPP & ASSOCIATES


                                   /s/Erin C. Dyer
                                   ERIN C. DYER
                                   Attorney for Plaintiff



                              LAW OFFICES OF HUMBERTO GUIZAR, APC


                             By:   /s/Humberto Guizar
                                   HUMBERTO GUIZAR
                                   CHRISTIAN CONTRERAS
                                   Attorney for Plaintiff
