0
 Pro Se 2 (Rev. 12/16) Complaint and Request for Injunction




                                           UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                                                         for the
                                                                                                             'LTS.-'DistridCqurt
                                                         EASTERN District ofWISCONSI                          Wiscon_sin.Ea^m.


                                                                                Division
                                                                                                                 AUG 2 8 2025
                                                                                                                       FILED


                                                                                                       te^/ffr
                                                                                                                  Clerk of_Coyrt..

                                                                                   Case No.

                                                                                              (to be filled in by the Clerk's Office)
                    ROBERT HAMMERSLEY

                            Plmntiff'(s)
Write the full name of each plaintiff who is filing this complaint.
If the iuime.1 of all the plaintiffs cannot fit in the space above,
please write "see attached " in the space and attach an additional
page with the full list of names.)
                                     -V-



       Joshua Lautenschlager Kaul, WISCONSIN
                     ATTORNEY GENERAL



                                 Defendants)
(Write the full name of each defendant who is being sued. If the
nimes of all the defendants cannot fit in the space above, please
write "see allached" in the space and attach an additional page
with the lull list 0} 'names.)




                                      COMPLAINT AND REQUEST FOR INJUNCTION


I. The Parties to This Complaint

           A. The Plaintiff(s)

                      Provide the information below for each plaintiff named in the complaint. Attach additional pages if
                      needed,

                                   Name                               ROBERT HAMMERSLEY
                                   Street Address                     309 BAYSIDE ROAD
                                   City and County                    LITTLE SUAMICO
                                   State and Zip Code                 Wl54141
                                   Telephone Number                   920-434-9322
                                   E-mail Address                     Hammerscastle@gmail.com



          B, The Defendant(s)

                      Provide the information below for each defendant named in the complaint, whether the defendant is an
                      individual, a government agency, an organization, or a corporation. For an individual defendant,
                      include the person's job or title (if known). Attach additional pages if needed.

                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                     Case 1:25-cv-01317-BBC                    Filed 08/28/25          Page 1 of 6        Document 1
Pro Se 2 (Rev. 12/16) Complaint and Request for Injunction



                     Defendant No. 1

                                Name                            Joshua Lautenschlager Kaul
                                Job or Title (if known]         Wisconsin Attorney General
                                Street Address                  17 W Main St,
                                City and County                 Madison
                                State and Zip Code              Madison, Wl 53703
                                Telephone Number                (608)266-1221
                                E-mail Address (if known)



                     Defendant No, 2

                                Name

                                Job or Title (if known)

                                Street Address

                                City and County

                                State and Zip Code

                                Telephone Number

                                E-mail Address (if known)



                     Defendant No, 3

                                Name

                                Job or Title (if known)

                                Street Address

                                City and County

                                State and Zip Code

                               Telephone Number

                               E-mail Address (if known)



                    Defendant No. 4

                               Name

                               Job or Title (if known)

                               Street Address

                               City and County

                               State and Zip Code

                               Telephone Number

                               E-mail Address (if known)




                   Case 1:25-cv-01317-BBC                    Filed 08/28/25     Page 2 of 6   Document 1   Page 2 of 6
Pro Se 2 (Rev. 12/16) Complaint and Request for Injunction



II. Basis for Jurisdiction


          Federal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction (limited power). Generally, only two types of cases can be
          heard in federal court: cases involving a federal question and cases involving diversity of citizenship of the
          parties. Under 28 U.S.C. § 1331, a case arising under the United States Constitution or federal laws or treaties
          is a federal question case. Under 28 U.S.C, § 1332, a case in which a citizen of one State sues a citizen of
          another State or nation and the amount at stake is more than $75,000 is a diversity of citizenship case. In a
          diversity of citizenship case, no defendant may be a citizen of the same State as any plaintiff.

          What is the basis for federal court jurisdiction? (check all that apply)

                      [Federal question I_[Diversity of citizenship



          Fill out the paragraphs in this section that apply to this case.

          A, If the Basis for Jurisdiction Is a Federal Question

                     List the specific federal statutes, federal treaties, and/or provisions of the United States Constitution that
                     are at issue in this case,


                     Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments. See memorandum for supplemental legal stance.


          B. If the Basis for Jurisdiction Is Diversity of Citizenship

                     1. The Plaintiff(s)

                               a. If the plaintiff is an individual

                                          The plaintiff, (name) , is a citizen of the

                                          State of (name)



                               b, If the plaintiff is a corporation

                                          The plaintiff, (name) , is incorporated

                                          under the laws of the State of (name) ,

                                          and has its principal place of business in the State of (name)




                               (If more than one plaintiff is named in the complaint, attach an additional page providing the
                               same information for each additional plaintiff.)

                    2. The Defendant(s)

                               a. If the defendant is an individual

                                          The defendant, (name) ROBERT HAMMERSLEY , is a citizen of

                                         the State of (name) WISCONSIN . Or is a citizen of
                                          (foreign nation)




                    Case 1:25-cv-01317-BBC                   Filed 08/28/25        Page 3 of 6        Document 1          Page 3 of 6
Pro Se 2 (Rev. 12/16) Complaint and Request for Injunction




                                b. If the defendant is a corporation

                                           The defendant, (name) , is incorporated under

                                           the laws of the State of (name) , and has its

                                           principal place of business in the State of (name)

                                           Or is incorporated under the laws of (foreign nation) ,

                                           and has its principal place of business in (mime)


                                (If more than one defendant is named in the complaifit, attach an additional page providing the
                                same information for each additional defendant.)

                     3, The Amount in Controversy


                                The amount in controversy-the amount the plaintiff claims the defendant owes or the amount at
                                stake-is more than $75,000, not counting interest and costs of court, because (explain):


                                N/A INJUNCTION RELEIF REQUESTED




HI. Statement of Claim

          Write a short and plain statement of the claim. Do not make legal arguments. State as briefly as possible the
          facts showing that each plaintiff is entitled to the injunction or other relief sought. State how each defendant
          was involved and what each defendant did that caused the plaintiff harm or violated the plaintiffs rights,
          including the dates and places of that involvement or conduct. If more than one claim is asserted, number each
          claim and write a short and plain statement of each claim in a separate paragraph. Attach additional pages if
          needed.


          A. Where did the events giving rise to your claim(s) occur?


                     In Brrown County Wisconsin. In the village of Suamico Wisconsin.




          B. What date and approximate time did the events giving rise to your claim(s) occur?


                     March 14, 2018.4-6am.




                   Case 1:25-cv-01317-BBC                    Filed 08/28/25        Page 4 of 6    Document 1               Page 4 of 6
Pro Se 2 (Rev, 12/16) Complaint and Request for Injunction



          C. What are the facts underlying your claim(s)? (For example: What happened to you? Who did what?
                     Was anyone else involved? Who else saw what happened?)

                      I was arrested by Brown County sherriffs for OWI.

                      I was compelled to consent to a warrantless blood test under the threat of criminal penalties for refusal.

                      During reading of informing the accused form I was hand cuffed and in the backseat of a locked squad
                     car.


                     Miranda rights were not read until after the blood test.

                     A warrant was required to take my blood because the blood test refusal forum has criminal penalties for
                     fftfi ip.ina fl-4Awtr-F»ntt<=><w-M<->FiFi-(-ifWA/ — —




IV. Irreparable Injury

          Explain why monetary damages at a later time would not adequately compensate you for the injuries you
          sustained, are sustaining, or will sustain as a result of the events described above, or why such compensation
          could not be measured.




V. Relief

          State briefly and precisely what damages or other relief the plaintiff asks the court to order. Do not make legal
          arguments. Include any basis for claiming that the wrongs alleged are continuing at the present time, Include
         the amounts of any actual damages claimed for the acts alleged and the basis for these amounts. Include any
         punitive or exemplary damages claimed, the amounts, and the reasons you claim you are entitled to actual or
         punitive money damages.


        A challenge to the refusal forum to suppress the evidence gathered must be brought before jusry trial. I seek
        injunctive releifto stay proceedings so that the State and/or Federal court can reveiw my claims and provide
        needed relief.




                   Case 1:25-cv-01317-BBC                     Filed 08/28/25    Page 5 of 6    Document 1               Page 5 of 6
Pro Se 2 (Rev. 12/16) Complaint and Request for Injunction




VI. Certification and Closing

          Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 11, by signing below, I certify to the best of my hiowledge, information,
          and belief that this complaint: (1) is not being presented for an improper purpose, such as to harass, cause
          unnecessary delay, or needlessly increase the cost of litigation; (2) is supported by existing law or by a
          nonfrivolous argument for extending, modifying, or reversing existing law; (3) the factual contentions have
          evidentiary support or, if specifically so identified, will likely have evidentiary support after a reasonable
          opportunity for further investigation or discovery; and (4) the complaint otherwise complies with the
          requirements of Rule 11 .


          A. For Parties Without an Attorney

                     I agree to provide the Clerk's Office with any changes to my address where case-related papers may be
                     served, I understand that my failure to keep a current address on file with the Clerk's Office may result
                     in the dismissal of my case.



                     Date of signing: Augustus, 20,25


                     Signature of Plaintiff

                     Printed Name of Plaintiff f/ Robert Hammersley


          B. For Attorneys


                    Date of signing:



                    Signature of Attorney

                    Printed Name of Attorney

                    Bar Number

                    Name of Law Finn

                    Street Address

                    State and Zip Code

                    Telephone Number

                    E-mail Address




                   Case 1:25-cv-01317-BBC                    Filed 08/28/25   Page 6 of 6     Document 1                   Page 6 of 6
