2026 IL 131710



                                          IN THE
                                 SUPREME COURT
                                              OF
                           THE STATE OF ILLINOIS




                                     (Docket No. 131710)

            GRIFFITH FOODS INTERNATIONAL, INC., et al., Appellees,
      v. NATIONAL UNION FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY OF PITTSBURGH, PA,
                                Appellant.


                               Opinion filed January 23, 2026.



        JUSTICE CUNNINGHAM delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion.

        Chief Justice Neville and Justices Theis, Overstreet, Holder White, and O’Brien
     concurred in the judgment and opinion.

        Justice Rochford took no part in the decision.



                                          OPINION

¶1       This case is before us on a question of Illinois law certified by the United States
     Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit pursuant to Illinois Supreme Court Rule
     20 (eff. Aug. 1, 1992). The certified question is:
            “In light of the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision in American States
        Insurance Co. v. Koloms, 687 N.E.2d 72 (1997), and mindful of Erie Insurance
        Exchange v. Imperial Marble Corp., 957 N.E.2d 1214 (2011), what relevance,
        if any, does a permit or regulation authorizing emissions (generally or at any
        particular levels) play in assessing the application of a pollution exclusion
        within a standard-form commercial general liability policy?”

¶2       For the following reasons, we answer the certified question as follows: a permit
     or regulation authorizing emissions (generally or at any particular levels) has no
     relevance in assessing the application of a pollution exclusion within a standard-
     form commercial general liability policy.


¶3                                    BACKGROUND

¶4        The appellees, Griffith Foods International, Inc., and its corporate successor,
     Sterigenics U.S., LLC (the policyholders), brought a consolidated action in the
     federal district court for the Northern District of Illinois against the appellant,
     National Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh, PA (insurer), seeking
     declarations that the insurer had a duty to defend the policyholders in an underlying
     mass tort case. The underlying tort litigation arose when residents of Willowbrook,
     Illinois, alleged that the policyholders had emitted ethylene oxide (EtO) from their
     medical-equipment sterilization facility for more than 35 years and that these
     emissions had caused nearby residents to experience a range of illnesses, including
     cancer and other serious diseases.

¶5       The insurer issued two commercial general liability (CGL) policies for the
     medical sterilization facility covering the period from September 1983 to
     September 1985. These policies required the insurer to “defend any suit against the
     insured seeking damages on account of *** bodily injury” that “occur[red] during
     the policy period” and “personal injury” arising out of “offenses committed during
     the policy period.”

¶6       The CGL policies included a standard pollution exclusion, which is the subject
     of this appeal. The pollution exclusion bars coverage for




                                             -2-
        “bodily injury or property damage arising out of the discharge, dispersal, release
        or escape of smoke, vapors, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids
        or gases, waste materials or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants into or
        upon land, the atmosphere or any water course or body of water.”

¶7        When the policyholders sought a declaration that the insurer had a duty to
     defend them in the underlying tort litigation, the insurer refused to defend based on
     the pollution exclusion. The federal district court held that the insurer had a duty to
     defend, ruling that the pollution exclusion in the CGL policies did not apply
     because the policyholders had emitted the EtO pursuant to a permit issued by the
     Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA).

¶8       The insurer appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh
     Circuit. Griffith Foods International Inc. v. National Union Fire Insurance Co. of
     Pittsburgh, 134 F.4th 483 (7th Cir. 2025). In its review, the Seventh Circuit noted
     that this court’s decision in American States Insurance Co. v. Koloms, 177 Ill. 2d
     473 (1997), “stand[s] centerstage in this dispute.” Griffith Foods, 134 F.4th at 490.
     The Seventh Circuit explained that Koloms “concerned whether injuries caused by
     carbon monoxide emissions from a defective furnace *** fell within a CGL
     policy’s pollution exclusion for duty to defend purposes.” Id. Ultimately, as
     described by the Seventh Circuit, the Koloms court “read the pollution exclusion as
     applying only to ‘injuries caused by traditional environmental pollution’ ” and
     therefore found that the pollution exclusion did not bar coverage for litigation
     regarding carbon monoxide emissions from a defective furnace. Id. at 491 (quoting
     Koloms, 177 Ill. 2d at 494).

¶9       The Seventh Circuit further stated that, if Koloms stood as the “only pertinent
     authority on the question presented, we would hold that the pollution exclusion in
     the CGL policies at issue here applies to exclude the possibility of coverage for the
     bodily injuries alleged ***—thereby relieving [the insurer] of any duty to defend
     [the policyholders].” Id. “But [the policyholders] implore us to pause and consider
     an [Illinois Appellate Court] decision that *** interpreted and applied Koloms,”
     Erie Insurance Exchange v. Imperial Marble Corp., 2011 IL App (3d) 100380.
     Griffith Foods, 134 F.4th at 491. The Seventh Circuit explained that, in Imperial
     Marble, the Illinois Appellate Court held that the pollution exclusion was
     ambiguous as to whether emission of hazardous materials in levels permitted by the




                                              -3-
       IEPA constitutes traditional environmental pollution in accordance with Koloms.
       Id. The appellate court resolved the ambiguity in favor of the policyholders and
       therefore held that the insurer had a duty to defend against the underlying claims.
       Id.

¶ 10       The Seventh Circuit continued: “Further muddying the waters is [the Seventh
       Circuit’s decision] applying Illinois law and interpreting a CGL pollution exclusion
       but coming after and taking an altogether different view than the one offered by
       Imperial Marble,” Scottsdale Indemnity Co. v. Village of Crestwood, 673 F.3d 715
       (7th Cir. 2012). Griffith Foods, 134 F.4th at 492. The Seventh Circuit explained
       that, in Scottsdale, it rejected the policyholder’s contention that contaminated
       drinking water was not pollution because the amount of pollutant was below the
       maximum level permitted by environmental regulation. Id. “For purposes of the
       pollution exclusion, we explained, all that mattered was that the suits alleged the
       contaminated water caused the underlying injuries.” Id.

¶ 11       The Seventh Circuit in this case stated that it was submitting the certified
       question to this court for clarification because “Koloms goes a long way in telling
       us how to interpret a standard pollution exclusion in a CGL insurance policy, but,
       underscored by the tension between Imperial Marble and Scottsdale, the exact
       scope of traditional environmental pollution remains unclear, and leaves us
       genuinely uncertain as to how to proceed.” 1 (Internal quotation marks omitted.) Id.

¶ 12       This court agreed to answer the certified question. See Ill. S. Ct. R. 20 (eff. Aug.
       1, 1992). The following organizations filed amici briefs in support of the insurer’s
       position: (1) Zurich American Insurance Company; (2) Swiss Re Corporate
       Solutions Elite Insurance Corporation; and (3) the American Property Casualty
       Insurance Association, the Complex Insurance Claims Litigation Association, the
       National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies, and the Illinois Insurance
       Association. The following organizations filed amici briefs in support of the
       policyholders’ position: (1) the Illinois Trial Lawyers Association; (2) Chemical
       Industry Council of Illinois and the American Chemistry Council; (3) Vantage


           1
            We note that, with respect to the underlying tort case out of which the certified
       question arose, the policyholders settled with the plaintiffs and paid damages; thus only the
       insurer’s duty to defend is before the Seventh Circuit.




                                                   -4-
       Ethylene Oxide Settlement Participants; (4) United Policyholders; and (5) the
       Illinois Manufacturers’ Association, Medline Industries, LP, Vantage Specialty
       Chemicals, Inc., Sterilization Services of Tennessee, Inc., and iBio. See Ill. S. Ct.
       R. 345 (eff. Sept. 20, 2010).


¶ 13                                       ANALYSIS

¶ 14      The certified question before us is:

              “In light of the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision in [Koloms], and mindful
          of [Imperial Marble], what relevance, if any, does a permit or regulation
          authorizing emissions (generally or at any particular levels) play in assessing
          the application of a pollution exclusion within a standard-form commercial
          general liability policy?”

¶ 15        Certified questions are questions of law that this court reviews de novo. Martin
       v. Goodrich Corp., 2025 IL 130509, ¶ 11. The certified question also involves the
       construction of an insurance policy, which presents an issue of law that is similarly
       reviewed de novo. Valley Forge Insurance Co. v. Swiderski Electronics, Inc., 223
       Ill. 2d 352, 360 (2006).

¶ 16       We begin our analysis by reviewing the cases that prompted the certified
       question, starting with Koloms. In Koloms, several employees of a commercial
       building brought a lawsuit against the building’s owners alleging that the owners
       had negligently maintained a furnace, which had emitted carbon monoxide and
       other noxious fumes and made them ill. Koloms, 177 Ill. 2d at 476. The building’s
       owners sought to have their insurer defend the litigation, but the insurer refused. Id.
       at 476-77. The insurer maintained that coverage was unavailable based on the
       pollution exclusion in the building owners’ CGL policy and, specifically, that the
       emission of carbon monoxide fumes from the furnace constituted the “ ‘release’ ”
       of a gaseous “ ‘irritant or contaminant’ ” within the meaning of the pollution
       exclusion. Id. at 477. Both the trial and appellate courts rejected this argument and
       concluded that the pollution exclusion language should be construed in favor of
       coverage. Id. at 478.




                                                 -5-
¶ 17        On appeal, this court affirmed the judgments of the lower courts. Id. at 494. In
       so doing, we reviewed the drafting history of the pollution exclusion in CGL
       policies. Id. at 489. This court noted that, beginning in the 1960s, the United States
       Congress substantially amended the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
       (1994)) to help protect and enhance the quality of the country’s air resources,
       especially in the wake of major environmental disasters. Koloms, 177 Ill. 2d at 490.
       This court explained that “[t]he passage of these amendments, which included
       provisions for cleaning up the environment, imposed greater economic burdens on
       insurance underwriters, particularly those drafting standard-form CGL policies.”
       Id. In response, the insurance industry drafted the pollution exclusion into standard
       CGL policies, with the predominant motivation being the avoidance of the
       enormous expense resulting from the explosion of environmental litigation. See id.
       at 490-93 (citing Weaver v. Royal Insurance Co. of America, 674 A.2d 975 (N.H.
       1996)). In light of this drafting history, this court stated: “We would be remiss,
       therefore, if we were to simply look to the bare words of the exclusion, ignore its
       raison d’ être, and apply it to situations which do not remotely resemble traditional
       environmental contamination.” Id. at 493. We noted that the pollution exclusion
       had a “potentially limitless application” but should only apply to those hazards
       traditionally associated with environmental pollution and nothing beyond. Id. at
       489.

¶ 18       This court in Koloms therefore concluded that the pollution exclusion in CGL
       policies applies only to those injuries caused by “traditional environmental
       pollution.” Id. at 494. Based on that reasoning, we held that the accidental release
       of carbon monoxide due to a broken furnace does not constitute traditional
       environmental pollution. Id. Therefore, the pollution exclusion did not apply under
       the facts presented in the Koloms case, and the insurer had a duty to defend. Id.

¶ 19       We next consider Imperial Marble, 2011 IL App (3d) 100380. In Imperial
       Marble, the insurer sought a declaration that, because of the pollution exclusion in
       the policyholder’s CGL policy, it had no duty to defend the policyholder in an
       underlying action alleging injuries caused by emissions from the policyholder’s
       manufacturing facility. Id. ¶ 3. Similar to the facts of the underlying case that raises
       the certified question before us now, the emissions in Imperial Marble were
       authorized under a permit issued by the IEPA. Id. ¶ 20. Based on the fact that it
       held a permit, the policyholder in Imperial Marble argued that its emission did not




                                                -6-
       qualify as pollutants under the pollution exclusion. Id. The appellate court
       concluded that “[t]he policy’s pollution exclusion is arguably ambiguous as to
       whether the emission of hazardous materials in levels permitted by an IEPA permit
       constitute traditional environmental pollution excluded under the policy” pursuant
       to Koloms. Id. ¶ 22. Because ambiguities must be resolved in favor of the
       policyholder, the appellate court found that the pollution exclusion did not apply
       and, consequently, the insurer had a duty to defend. Id. ¶ 23.

¶ 20       In another case, Country Mutual Insurance Co. v. Bible Pork, Inc., 2015 IL App
       (5th) 140211, ¶ 41, the appellate court followed Imperial Marble’s analysis. Thus,
       the appellate court there also concluded that the pollution exclusion is ambiguous
       as to whether the emission of hazardous materials in levels authorized by an IEPA
       permit is “traditional environmental pollution” as defined in Koloms. (Internal
       quotation marks omitted.) Id. The appellate court noted that, when there are
       ambiguities in an insurance policy, the policy is liberally construed in favor of the
       policyholder. Id. ¶ 38. Accordingly, the appellate court in Bible Pork held that the
       pollution exclusion did not apply to the permitted pollution in that case. Id. ¶ 41.

¶ 21       Lastly, we analyze Scottsdale, 673 F.3d 715. In Scottsdale, insurers sought a
       declaration that, because of the pollution exclusion, they had no duty to defend the
       policyholders in underlying lawsuits alleging injuries caused by contaminated
       groundwater. Id. at 716. The policyholders, in response, argued that the pollution
       exclusion did not apply, in part because the amount of contaminant in the water
       supply was below the maximum level permitted by environmental regulations and
       so this was “not a pollution case at all.” Id. at 721. The Seventh Circuit rejected this
       argument, stating:

          “either the [contaminant] caused injuries, maybe because the relevant
          regulations are too lax, or it did not and the tort suits will fail. All that counts is
          that the suits are premised on a claim that the [contaminant] caused injuries for
          which the plaintiffs are seeking damages, and that claim triggers the pollution
          exclusion.” Id.

       Further, the Seventh Circuit stressed that the very nature of the underlying
       complaints revealed it was a pollution case and that the complaints, which described
       the nature and effects of the contaminated groundwater in detail, “inadvertently but
       unmistakably acknowledge[d] the applicability of the pollution exclusion.” Id. The



                                                 -7-
       Seventh Circuit therefore affirmed the lower courts’ holdings that the claims against
       the policyholders alleging groundwater contamination fell within the scope of the
       pollution exclusion. Id.

¶ 22       With the foregoing cases in mind, we now turn to the certified question before
       us. The insurer urges us to answer the certified question by holding that a permit or
       regulation authorizing emissions plays no role in assessing the application of a
       pollution exclusion within a standard-form CGL policy. The insurer argues that the
       pollution exclusion does not include an exception for government-authorized toxic
       emissions, so it is irrelevant that the policyholders had a permit from the IEPA
       allowing them to emit the emissions at issue in the underlying lawsuits. The insurer
       asserts that Koloms’s review of the drafting history of the pollution exclusion
       confirms that the exclusion applies to authorized emissions, as it was drafted in
       response to increasing environmental lawsuits and therefore increasing insurer
       liability. The insurer also notes that, if we were to rule that the pollution exclusion
       in CGL policies does not apply to permitted emissions, Illinois would be the first
       state to reach such a holding.

¶ 23       Conversely, the policyholders urge us to answer the certified question by
       holding that the pollution exclusion does not relieve the insurer of its duty to defend
       the policyholders from tort lawsuits alleging injuries arising from the emission of
       hazardous materials in levels authorized by an IEPA permit. The policyholders
       argue that, once the IEPA issues a permit authorizing emissions, the IEPA has
       deemed those emissions to no longer be pollution. Therefore, according to the
       policyholders, there is at least an ambiguity as to whether those permitted emissions
       are “traditional environmental pollution” pursuant to Koloms. And, because
       ambiguities must be resolved in favor of the insured, the policyholders contend the
       pollution exclusion cannot apply. We disagree.

¶ 24       In interpreting an insurance policy, our primary objective is to ascertain and
       give effect to the intention of the parties, as expressed in the policy language. Hobbs
       v. Hartford Insurance Co. of the Midwest, 214 Ill. 2d 11, 17 (2005). “Undefined
       terms [in an insurance contract] will be given their plain, ordinary, and popular
       meaning; i.e., they will be construed with reference to the average, ordinary,
       normal, reasonable person.” (Internal quotation marks omitted.) Acuity v. M/I
       Homes of Chicago, LLC, 2023 IL 129087, ¶ 30. Further, when construing the




                                                -8-
       language of an insurance policy “we will not strain to find an ambiguity where none
       exists.” Hobbs, 214 Ill. 2d at 17.

¶ 25        The plain language of the pollution exclusion states that coverage is barred for
       litigation involving “the discharge, dispersal, release or escape of smoke, vapors,
       soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste materials or
       other irritants, contaminants or pollutants into or upon land, the atmosphere or any
       water course or body of water.” As the Seventh Circuit noted, the discharge of EtO
       emissions into the atmosphere at issue in this case fits squarely within that plain
       language. Griffith Foods, 134 F.4th at 491. Moreover, the emissions fit squarely
       within the plain and ordinary meaning of “traditional environmental pollution”
       (Koloms, 177 Ill. 2d at 494) or “pollution harms as ordinarily understood”
       (Scottsdale, 673 F.3d at 717).

¶ 26       The fact that the IEPA permitted the EtO emissions does not change this
       analysis. The pollution exclusion says nothing about permitted or authorized
       pollution, and courts “must not inject terms and conditions different from those
       agreed upon by the parties.” State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v.
       Elmore, 2020 IL 125441, ¶ 23. Further, the IEPA permit did not change the
       character or substance of the EtO emissions as pollution. Indeed, if the EtO
       emissions were not pollution, there would have been no need for the policyholders
       to obtain a permit from IEPA in the first place. In other words, the permit allowing
       the policyholders to emit EtO did not, in some manner, render those emissions no
       longer pollution in the plain and ordinarily understood meaning of the word.

¶ 27       In addition, as explained by this court in Koloms, the pollution exclusion in
       CGL policies was drafted in response to the insurance industry’s concerns about
       increasing, costly environmental litigation. Koloms, 177 Ill. 2d at 492. Declining to
       apply the pollution exclusion simply because the pollution was permitted by the
       State would undermine the pollution exclusion’s very purpose.

¶ 28       The pollution exclusion, standard in CGL policies, specifically precludes
       coverage for litigation costs arising from pollution harms as ordinarily understood,
       but that does not mean that coverage is categorically unavailable for claims arising
       from the discharge of pollutants. We note that insurance companies have developed
       entirely separate pollution liability policies for purchase, which allow the insurers
       to assess the risk of costly environmental litigation. Without speculating on the



                                               -9-
       availability of such policies to any particular insureds, we emphasize that these
       separate policies generally provide the policyholders with coverage for
       environmental lawsuits.

¶ 29       In sum, in determining whether the pollution exclusion in a CGL policy applies,
       we hold that it is irrelevant whether the underlying pollution is permitted or not.
       Rather, as the Scottsdale court said: “[a]ll that counts is that the [underlying] suits
       are premised on a claim that the [emissions] caused injuries for which the plaintiffs
       are seeking damages, and that claim triggers the pollution exclusion.” Scottsdale,
       673 F.3d at 721. To the extent that Imperial Marble and Bible Pork are at odds with
       this conclusion, those decisions are overruled.


¶ 30                                      CONCLUSION

¶ 31       For the foregoing reasons, we answer the certified question as follows: a permit
       or regulation authorizing emissions (generally or at any particular levels) has no
       relevance in assessing the application of a pollution exclusion within a standard-
       form commercial general liability policy.


¶ 32      Certified question answered.


¶ 33       JUSTICE ROCHFORD took no part in the consideration or decision of this
       case.




                                               - 10 -