UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
         FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF ILLINOIS                       
                   EASTERN DIVISION                                  

STOP ILLINOIS HEALTH CARE FRAUD, LLC,  )                                  
                              )                                      
     Plaintiff,               )    Case No. 12-cv-09306              
                              )                                      
v.                            )    Judge Sharon Johnson Coleman      
                              )                                      
ASIF SAYEED, et al.,               )                                      
                              )                                      
     Defendants.              )                                      


           MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER                              
Before the Court is a motion to reconsider the sanctions imposed on Defendants in the 
Court’s order of December 15, 2025. For the following reasons, Defendants’ motion [514],[516] is 
denied.                                                                   
                     BACKGROUND                                      
The Court will presume familiarity with the background of this case; a more detailed treatment 
can be found in prior orders. See, e.g., Stop Illinois Health Care Fraud, LLC v. Sayeed, No. 12-CV-09306, 
2025 WL 3628621, at *1–2, *1 n.1 (N.D. Ill. Dec. 15, 2025) [hereinafter “Sanctions Order”]. 
On December 15, 2025, the Court found that Defendants committed a severe violation of 
their obligation to disclose “the existence of at least four potential witnesses who may have known 
relevant  information  about  Defendants’  claims  for  reimbursement  to  Medicare  and  Medicaid, 
including the claims in the logs” known as “Exhibit 9.” Id. at *4. Exhibit 9, which consists of 673 
requests for Medicare payment submitted by Defendants between December 13, 2010 and June 3, 
2015, is the central document in the damages dispute between the Parties. Id. at *2. 
The existence of the four witnesses at issue—Kerry Theodoropoulos, Valerie Roach, Asim 
Farooqi, and Amy Zavesky—first came to the Court’s attention when Defendants listed them as 
possible witnesses for an October 16, 2024 evidentiary hearing. Id.; see dkt. 475. Defendants stated that 
the witnesses would only be called for the purposes of document authentication; however, at the 
hearing, and in the now-stricken documents that Defendants introduced, it became apparent that at 
least Ms. Theodoropoulos and Ms. Roache likely possessed substantive information relevant to 
Plaintiffs’ claims.See dkt. 480 at 49–60, 71; dkt. 492-2. But Plaintiffs averred that they did not have 
previous knowledge of any of the names on Defendants’ list. Dkt. 494 at *6–7; see also dkt. 480 at 56–

60.                                                                       
 The Court therefore found that Defendants failed to disclose Ms. Theodoropoulos, Ms. 
Roach, Mr. Farooqi, and Ms. Zavesky, and possibly unknown others, as potential witnesses. Id. at *4–
5. In doing so, Defendants acted in bad faith, potentially prolonging this case by years, because “There 
is no conceivable way that Defendants were unaware of the relevance of” the undisclosed witnesses. 
Id. at *5 (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(1)(E)). The Court declined Plaintiff-Relator’s suggestion to simply 
re-enter  the  Court’s  prior  damages  judgement,  with  interest.  Instead,  the  Court  opted  to  fine 
Defendants in an amount equal to ten percent of that prior damages judgement. Id. at *6. The Court 
also imposed additional sanctions in the same amount to be assessed every thirty days until the 
damages dispute had been resolved, or the case settled. Id. The immediate sanctions were imposed on 
December 15, 2025, with the issuance of the order. Id. at *7. The first assessment of continuing 
sanctions took effect on January 14, 2026; if applicable, the second assessment will take effect on 

February 13, 2026.                                                        
On January 2, 2026, Defendants filed the instant motion, requesting that the Court reconsider 
its sanctions order. Dkt. 514. The next day, Defendants filed a slightly amended version of their brief.1 
Dkt. 516 [hereinafter Def. Br.]. After receiving the motion, the Court ordered that “Defendants’ 
obligation to pay the sanctions ordered by the Court” would be stayed until February 23, 2026. Dkt. 

1 All citations in this opinion to Defendants’ motion will refer to the amended brief. 
518. Plaintiff-Relator and Defendants timely submitted their response and reply, respectively, and the 
Court held brief oral arguments on January 28, 2026.                      

                    LEGAL STANDARD                                   
It is well-established that in determining whether to grant a motion to reconsider, the Court 
retains sound discretion. Caisse v. Natioanle de Credit v. CBI Industries, Inc., 90 F.3d 1264, 1270 (7th Cir. 
1996). “Motions to reconsider are not at the disposal of parties who want to ‘rehash’ old arguments, 
and such motions are not the appropriate vehicles for tendering new legal theories for the first time.” 
In re Oil Spill by the “Amoco Cadiz,” 794 F. Supp. 261, 267 (N.D. Ill. 1992), aff’d, 4 F.3d 997 (7th Cir. 
1993). A motion to reconsider serves a limited function and should only be presented when there has 
been a significant change in law or facts after the issue is presented to the Court, or the Court has 
“patently misunderstood a party,” has “made a decision outside the adversarial issues presented” to it 
or has “made an error not of reasoning but of apprehension.” Bank of Waunakee v. Rochester Cheese Sales, 
Inc., 906 F.2d 1185, 1191 (7th Cir. 1990). “Such problems rarely arise and the motions to reconsider 
should be equally rare.” Id. (internal quotations omitted).               

                      DISCUSSION                                     
Defendants’ motion brief, which contains no headings of any sort, does not clearly state the 
legal grounds on which they believe reconsideration is warranted. See generally Def. Br. However, 
Defendants seem to be making two points. First, they argue that the sanctions are unwarranted 
because, they claim, the witnesses in question either were in fact disclosed to Plaintiffs, or else because 
Defendants were substantially justified in failing to disclose. Second, Defendants argue that the Court 
is using sanctions for an improper and “coercive” purpose. With one minor exception, neither 
argument holds water.2                                                    

2 The Court will not address Defendants’ continued and pervasive attempts to relitigate issues that have been 
adjudicated and affirmed—such as whether Plaintiffs have met their evidentiary burden—except to note that 
I.   Failure to Disclose Witnesses                                        
The Court begins with the exception noted above. The Court’s sanctions order stemmed from 
Defendants’ failure to disclose the existence of certain witnesses who may have held discoverable 
information. However, Defendants have shown convincingly that they did, in fact, disclose Asim 
Farooqi as a potential substantive witness. Def. Br. *3; dkt. 514-1 at *2. The Court acknowledges this 
error of apprehension. See Bank of Waunakee, 906 F.2d 1185, 1191 (7th Cir. 1990). However, the error 

was harmless. The Court’s analysis of Defendants’ failure to disclose witnesses rested primarily on 
recent revelations concerning Ms. Theodoropoulos and Ms. Roach. See Sanctions Order *4–6. Indeed, 
Mr. Farooqi’s name does not appear at all in the Court’s opinion; he is instead referenced only 
collectively through an invocation of the list of four witnesses submitted by Defendants prior to the 
October 16, 2024 evidentiary hearing. Id.at *2; see dkt. 475. The Court regrets its error concerning Mr. 
Farooqi, but given that he was not involved in the Court’s primary analysis, the error does not begin 
to approach the threshold necessary for reconsideration. Foster v. DeLuca, 545 F.3d 582, 584 (7th Cir. 
2008) (granting a motion to reconsider is an “extraordinary remed[y] reserved for the exceptional 
case”).                                                                   
With respect to the other witnesses, the Court first observes that Defendants’ brief tends to 
mischaracterize the basis of the sanctions imposed by the Court. Defendants repeatedly claim that 
they are being punished for submitting proposed new witnesses for authentication purposes. See, e.g., 

Def. Br. *2, 5; dkt. 521 at *4, 7. But that is incorrect. While Defendants’ submission of authentication 
witnesses may have brought the matter to Plaintiffs’ and the Court’s attention, the sanctionable 
conduct occurred years earlier, when Defendants should have disclosed the names of these witnesses 
and (except for Mr. Farooqi) failed to do so. The Court made this quite clear in its opinion. See, e.g., 

such issues are irrelevant to the question of whether the sanctions were appropriate. See, e.g., Def. Br. *8; dkt. 
521 at *3–5.                                                              
Sanctions Order *4 (“The issue here is not really the newness of the evidence, but rather its oldness.”). 
Defendants’ mischaracterization to the contrary smacks of deliberate obfuscation. 
On the occasions when Defendants do engage with the substantive basis of the Court’s 
sanctions, they argue that Plaintiffs “knew enough” about Ms. Theodoropoulos because her name 
came up during a deposition of Defendant Sayeed. Def. Br. *3; dkt. 514-3; see also 514-4. But this is 
insufficient notice under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(a). As another court in this district has 

held, “knowing an individual exists does not equate with knowing that the witness has discoverable 
information related to the claims or defenses at issue in the suit, let alone that the witness has first-
hand knowledge of admissible evidence and may testify at trial.” Doe 1 v. City of Chicago, No. 18-CV-
3054, 2019 WL 5290899, at *8 (N.D. Ill. Oct. 18, 2019) (Harjani, J.); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(1)(A)(i) 
& Advisory Committee Comments to 1993 Amendments (“As officers of the court, counsel are 
expected to disclose the identity of those persons who may be used by them as witnesses or who, if 
their potential testimony were known, might reasonably be expected to be deposed or called as a 
witness by any of the other parties. Indicating briefly the general topics on which such persons have 
information should not be burdensome, and will assist other parties in deciding which depositions will 
actually be needed.”). If anything, the fact that Ms. Theodoropoulos’s name came up during the 
deposition ought to have put Defendants on notice that they had already neglected to disclose her as 
a potential witness, and thus had an obligation under Rule 26(e) to supplement their disclosures. 

Additionally, Mr. Sayeed’s deposition statements concerning Ms. Theodoropoulos conflict 
with Defendants’ questioning of her at the October 16, 2024 hearing. At his 2019 deposition, Mr. 
Sayeed claimed that Ms. Theodoropoulos wouldn’t have any information about records relating to the 
illegal kickback scheme. Dkt. 514-3. But at the hearing, and although Ms. Theodoropoulos was only 
called for the purpose of document authentication, Defendants began asking questions that strayed 
into substantive testimony concerning the referrals at issue in Exhibit 9. Dkt. 480 at 61–64. The Court 
sustained Plaintiff-Relator’s objection to such questions, id., but the fact that Defendants asked the 
questions at all indicates that Ms. Theodoropoulos may have known much more than Mr. Sayeed 
implied back in 2019. Thus, rather than providing any argument for reconsideration, Defendants have 
instead pointed to additional evidence that they acted in bad faith.      
With respect to Ms. Roache, Defendants resort to a strawman argument, claiming that the 
Court’s conclusion that she should have been disclosed “is tantamount to suggesting Defendants 

should have identified each person who worked at the companies.” Def. Br. *4. That, of course, is not 
the case. Defendants’ obligation under Rule 26(a) is the same as it ever was: to disclose “the name 
and, if known, the address and telephone number of each individual likely to have discoverable 
information—along with the subjects of that information—that the disclosing party may use to 
support its claims or defenses, unless the use would be solely for impeachment.” The stricken 
document that Defendants attempted to introduce at the October 16, 2024 hearing contained ample 
evidence that Ms. Roache likely possessed discoverable knowledge about Defendants’ illegal referrals. 
Defendants’ argument to the contrary—that Ms. Roache’s task of writing referrals provides no reason 
to conclude that she possessed discoverable information, and that her nondisclosure was therefore 
substantially justified—is unexplained and unexplainable. Def. Br. at *5. Under Rule 37(c)(1), failures 
to disclose may be excused if they are “substantially justified,” which the Seventh Circuit has held 
means “has a reasonable basis in law and fact.” Pable v. Chicago Transit Auth., 145 F.4th 712, 724 (7th 

Cir.  2025).  Here  no  such  reasonable  basis  exists,  and  Defendants  cannot  save  themselves  by 
pretending, in spite of the evidence that they themselves attempted to introduce, that Ms. Roache had 
no involvement with these records.                                        
Then there is Ms. Zavesky, about whom very little appears to be known. Defendants claim 
that she has not been referenced in any document in this case’s voluminous docket, and—aside from 
the list submitted prior to the October 16, 2024 hearing—the Court believes they are correct. Def. Br. 
*5 n.2. Defendants are also correct that there is no evidence specifically indicating that Ms. Zavesky 
possessed discoverable information. Id. But, as with Mr. Farooqi, the Court’s sanctions order had very 
little to do with Ms. Zavesky. To the extent she was implicated, it was only because, given what is now 
known about Ms. Theodoropoulos and Ms. Roache, it is reasonable to suspect that she may also have 
possessed  such  information.  See  Sanctions  Order  *4–6  (“Today,  we  know  that  at  least  Ms. 
Theodoropoulos and Ms. Roache possessed information that may have aided Plaintiffs in making such 

determinations. That may also be true of the other two potential witnesses identified by Defendants 
prior to the October 16, 2024 hearing, and perhaps even of other people who are still completely 
unknown.”). The lack of direct evidence implicating Ms. Zavesky was known by the Court at the time 
of its sanctions order, and does not constitute grounds for reconsideration. Bank of Waunakee, 906 
F.2d at 1191.                                                             
In summary, Defendants have shown that they did properly disclose Mr. Farooqi as a witness. 
However, the Court’s sanctions order did not base any significant part of its analysis on him. With 
respect to the other witnesses, Defendants have not shown that they were either disclosed at the 
proper time or that Defendants were substantially justified in failing to disclose them. To the extent 
that Defendants have tried to argue to the contrary, they have instead only offered more evidence of 
their own bad faith. The Court finds that its assessment of Defendant’s misconduct—with the minor 
exception of the role of Mr. Farooqi—was correct and appropriate.         

II.  Appropriateness of Sanctions                                         
Defendants also attempt to argue that, regardless of anything else, the Court’s sanctions are 
“an affront to the fair conduct of proceedings as its practical effect is to coerce Defendants to settle 
in an unfavorable amount[.]” Def. Br. at 9. As an initial matter, that may or may not be the practical 
effect of the sanctions. First, as the Court specified in its order, the sanctions are intended to make the 
People whole—not Plaintiff-Relator. Sanctions Order *6. The sanctions will not contribute to Plaintiff-
Relator’s attorney’s fees or otherwise to Plaintiff-Relator’s pocketbook. Additionally, Plaintiffs have 
their own incentives to bring this case, at long last, to a speedy conclusion. If the Court determines 
that Plaintiffs are dragging out settlement negotiations in bad faith, then that could be grounds for 
sanctions of their own. As such, the Court disagrees with Defendants’ assessment of the “practical 
effect” of the sanctions.                                                 
More broadly, Defendants cite no case law in support of their accusation of unfair coercion. 

Def. Br. *9–10; see also dkt. 521 at *7–10. That is unsurprising, because “coerciveness” is not a reason 
to find sanctions improper. Indeed, all sanctions are coercive to a certain extent, in that they seek to 
punish a party for bad behavior and to encourage good behavior down the road. However, “coercive” 
is also a legal term of art in this context. As the Seventh Circuit has explained, 
civil sanctions fall in two categories. They can compensate the complainant for his 
losses caused by the contemptuous conduct. Or they can coerce the contemnor's 
compliance with a court order. A coercive sanction must afford the contemnor the 
opportunity to “purge,” meaning the contemnor can avoid punishment by complying 
with the court order. … Without a purge provision, the order is not coercive. 
F.T.C. v. Trudeau, 579 F.3d 754, 769–770 (7th Cir. 2009) (citations omitted). The court went on to 
clarify that compensatory sanctions must have two key hallmarks: (1) an explanation of how the 
sanction was calculated; and (2) an explanation of how the sanction should be administered. Id. at 770.  
Based on this schema, the sanctions imposed by the Court are compensatory rather than 
coercive. As noted above, the sanctions are necessary to make the People whole after Defendant’s 
misconduct. Sanctions Order *6. The Court also explained the calculation of the sanctions (ten percent 
of the previously entered judgment) and their administration (pay each month to the Clerk, who will 
put  it  in  a  blocked,  interest-bearing  account).  The  previously  entered  judgment  represents  an 
appropriate baseline for the sanctions calculation because it is the proceedings leading up to and 
following that judgment that have been most impacted by Defendants’ misconduct. Ten percent of 
that judgment as an immediate sanction represents the Court’s reasonable judgment of what is 
necessary to make the People whole, given the significant expenditure of public resources on a case 
that very well could have ended several years ago if not for Defendants’ egregious violations of 
discovery rules. Continuing sanctions in the same amount are also appropriate to compensate the 
People for any continuing dawdling. The Seventh Circuit has made clear that this situation presents a 
proper use of sanctions, and that, rather than Defendants’ uncited accusations of coercion, is the 
applicable law at issue. Trudeau, 579 F.3d at 769–770.                    

The Court also observes that Defendants’ behavior since the imposition of the sanctions has 
confirmed their appropriateness. Defendants certainly had the right to move for reconsideration, but 
the vague and unsupported instant motion wastes everyone’s time. Still more concerning is that 
Defendants have asserted, baselessly, that the Court’s sanctions order will “influence[] how the 
Magistrate Judge views the case, both consciously and perhaps subconsciously, with how she will 
conduct the settlement conference and whether she will take an impartial ‘fresh’ view of the parties’ 
positions.” Def. Br. *11. Consequently, and seemingly at Defendants’ request, the magistrate judge 
struck a scheduled settlement conference and refrained from setting a new conference until after the 
Court’s resolution of the instant motion. Dkt. 519. Thus, in addition to dishonorably impugning the 
character and professionalism of an able magistrate judge, Defendants have continued to engage in 
exactly the sort of delay that the Court’s sanctions sought to punish. The Court will not abide any 
further disrespect of the magistrate judge, nor will it abide any further delay tactics. 

                     CONCLUSION                                      
For the reasons stated above, Defendants’ motion to reconsider [514], [516] is denied. The 
Court lifts its stay of Defendants’ obligation to pay the sanctions imposed by this Court. The payment 
owed for the immediate sanctions the Court imposed in its order of December 15, 2025 will be due 
to the Clerk of the Court within two weeks of this Order. The payment for Defendants’ first 
continuing sanctions, which took effect on January 14, 2026, will be due within four weeks of this 
Order. Defendants’ second continuing sanctions, if applicable, will be assessed as previously ordered, 
on February 13, 2026, with payment due 30 days later. Any further continuing sanctions will be 
imposed in accordance with the terms of the Court’s order of December 15, 2025. 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 
Date: 2/4/2026                                 4h 
                               Entered:                        
                                      SHARON JOHNSON COLEMAN 
                                      United States District Judge 

                               —10—