UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
            FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF ILLINOIS                       
                      EASTERN DIVISION                                  

JESSICA SMITH and JOSEPH SMITH, on  )                                     
Behalf of JAEL SMITH, a minor,    )                                       
                            )                                           
   Plaintiffs,              )                                           
                            )                                           
             v.             )                                           
                            )                                           
WANABANA, LLC, WANABANA USA   )    Case No. 24-cv-02196                   
LLC, WANABANA EXCHANGE, LLC,  )                                           
DOLLAR TREE, INC., DOLLAR TREE  )  Judge Sharon Johnson Coleman           
STORES, INC., AUSTROFOOD S.A.S.,  )                                       
AUSTROFOOD CIA. LTDA., GRUPO  )                                           
NAVIS LLC a/k/a NAVIS LLC,    )                                           
CARIBBEAN PRODUCE EXCHANGE,   )                                           
LLC, and S&S NEGOCOIS ASOCIADOS  )                                        
MAYORISTAS NEGASMART S.A.,    )                                           
                            )                                           
   Defendants.              )                                           


              MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER                              

   Plaintiffs, Jessica Smith and Joseph Smith, on behalf of Jael Smith, a minor (“Plaintiffs”) 
brought this case alleging that Grupo Navis LLC (“Navis”) controlled the design, manufacture, and 
sale of WanaBana Apple Cinnamon Fruit Purée pouches (the “Fruit Pouch”), which contained 
unsafe levels of poisonous or otherwise hazardous lead.  Plaintiffs claim that their daughter suffered 
bodily harm as a result of consuming the contaminated Fruit Pouch regularly for nearly one year.   
   Before the Court is Navis’s motion to dismiss all claims asserted against it under Federal 
Rule of Civil Procedure (“FRCP”) 12b(6) and 735 ILCS 5/2-621.  For the reasons set forth below, 
Navis’s motion to dismiss is denied in part and granted in part [115].    
BACKGROUND                                                                
   The following facts are drawn from Plaintiffs’ third amended complaint (the “Complaint”) 
and are accepted as true for the purpose of resolving the instant motions to dismiss.     
   Navis is an LLC that does business in Illinois and is registered with the Illinois Secretary of 
State.  Navis was in the business of designing, manufacturing and selling food and food products.  
Caribbean Produce Exchange (“CPE”), a Puerto Rico corporation, was wholly-owned by Navis, its 

parent company.  CPE was registered with the Food and Drug Administration Foreign Supplier 
Verification Program (“FSVP”) as a supplier and importer of Wanabana food products.  Under 
FSVP regulations, CPE was required to identify, assess, and document known or reasonably 
foreseeable hazards in Wanabana products, and require controls to prevent them. 
   Sometime prior to 2018, agents of Navis and CPE met Defendants Austrofood S.A.S. and 
Austrofood CIA. LTDA (together, “Austrofood”) at a trade show.  Navis and CPE “recruited” 
Austrofood to create “a series of sham companies”—including Wanabana, LLC, Wanabana 
Exchange, LLC, and Wanabana USA, LLC (together, “Wanabana”)—to participate in designing, 
manufacturing and selling food products.                                  
   The Fruit Pouch was manufactured at Austrofood’s facilities in Ecuador.  Plaintiffs allege 
that Wanabana purchased the Fruit Pouch while they were en route from Ecuador and sold them to 
retailers in the United States.  Plaintiffs allege that Navis oversaw the management of Wanabana’s 

operations and enjoyed the profits generated by the sale of the Fruit Pouch.   
   Plaintiffs purchased the Fruit Pouch at retail locations in Illinois and fed them to their minor 
child for nearly a year.  On November 7, 2023, Plaintiffs’ child was diagnosed with heightened levels 
of lead in her blood.  The diagnosis was a result of regularly consuming the Fruit Pouch, which 
contained unsafe levels of poisonous and otherwise hazardous lead.  Plaintiffs allege that Navis was 
aware of the risk of lead in spices such as cinnamon, a main ingredient in the Fruit Pouch.   
   Plaintiffs claim that Navis had the authority to control, test, and inspect the manufacturing 
facilities and the Fruit Pouches they produced.  Navis knew or should have known that the Fruit 
Pouch contained lead, was an adulterated product, and that the Fruit Pouch’s labeling did not 
include the presence of lead.                                             

LEGAL STANDARD                                                            
   A motion to dismiss pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6) tests the sufficiency of the complaint, not its 
merits.  See Camasta v. Jos. A. Bank Clothiers, Inc., 761 F.3d 732, 736 (7th Cir. 2014).   To survive a 
motion to dismiss, a plaintiff must “state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.”  Bell Atlantic 
Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007).  A complaint is 
facially plausible when the plaintiff alleges “factual content that allows the court to draw the 
reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged.”  Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 
U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L.Ed.2d 868 (2009).  When considering dismissal of a complaint 
pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6), the Court accepts well-pleaded factual allegations as true and draws all 
reasonable inferences in favor of the plaintiff.  See Felland v. Clifton, 682 F.3d 665, 672 (7th Cir. 2012); 
Trujillo v. Rockledge Furniture LLC, 926 F.3d 395, 397 (7th Cir. 2019).   
DISCUSSION                                                                

   Navis moves to dismiss five counts of Plaintiffs’ complaint for failure to state a claim: 
negligence (Count XV), strict liability (Count XVI), breach of implied warranty (Count XVII), 
breach of express warranty (Count XVIII), and claims under the Family Expense Act, 750 ILCS 
65/15 (Count XIX).                                                        
I.   Count XVI: Strict Liability                                        
   Plaintiffs allege that Navis is strictly liable for designing, manufacturing, and selling the 
defective and unreasonably dangerous Fruit Pouch.  Navis argues that because it was not the 
manufacturer of the Fruit Pouch, it is immune from Plaintiffs’ strict liability claims under the Illinois 
Seller’s Exception, 735 ILCS 5/2-621.  The Illinois Seller’s Exception requires dismissal of a 
nonmanufacturing defendant from a strict liability action if such defendant identifies the 

manufacturer of an allegedly defective product.  Brobbey v. Enter. Leasing Co. of Chi., 404 Ill. App. 3d 
420, 428, 935 N.E.2d 1084, 1092 (1st Dist. 2010).  The exception is intended to allow 
nonmanufacturing defendants to defer liability upstream to the manufacturers of defective products.  
See Brobbey, 404 Ill. App. 3d at 428; see also Cherry v. Siemans Medical Systems, Inc., 206 Ill. App. 3d 1055, 
1060–61, 565 N.E.2d 215, 218 (1st Dist. 1990).                            
   The parties have already identified the manufacturer of the Fruit Pouch.  In Defendant 
Dollar Tree’s motion to dismiss, Dollar Tree filed an affidavit identifying Wanabana as the 
manufacturer of the Fruit Pouch.  Wanabana then filed a third-party complaint identifying 
Austrofood as the correct manufacturer, and Plaintiffs filed a First Amended Complaint asserting 
claims against Austrofood as the manufacturer of the Fruit Pouch.  Here again, Navis filed an 
affidavit identifying the manufacturer of the Fruit Pouch as Austrofood in compliance with the 
Illinois Seller’s Exception requirements.  See 735 ILCS 5/2-621(b).  Because Navis is immune, the 

Court dismisses Count XVI.                                                
II.  Count XV: Negligence                                               
   Plaintiffs claim that Navis was negligent in breaching its duty to exercise reasonable care in 
the sale of its products such that they were safe for consumers, proximately causing Plaintiffs’ child’s 
injuries.  In Illinois, product liability cases asserting negligence fall under the standard of common 
law negligence. Calles v. Scripto–Tokai Corp., 224 Ill.2d 247, 309 Ill.Dec. 383, 864 N.E.2d 249, 263 
(2007).  It is insufficient to only allege that a product is defective or unsafe.  Calles, 224 Ill.2d at 270.  
To support a negligence claim, plaintiffs must allege that a defendant was at fault and thus liable for 
their injuries.  Id. at 270.  A plaintiff must also show that defendant “knew or should have known of 
the risk posed by the product.”  Jones v. UPR Fruit Pouch, Inc., No. 14-cv-1248, 2015 WL 3463367, at 
*5 (N.D. Ill. May 29, 2015) (Alonso, J).                                  
   According to Navis, the Fruit Pouch was already contaminated with lead when it left the 

manufacturer.  Navis therefore argues that because “the products were already contaminated 
through no fault of [theirs],” Plaintiffs failed to state a negligence claim against them.  This argument 
is unavailing.  While Plaintiffs must allege Navis was at fault for their child’s injuries, they are not 
required to allege that Navis itself caused the Fruit Pouch to be contaminated.  Plaintiffs allege that 
Navis “knew or should have known of the risk posed” by the Fruit Pouch.  Its alleged negligent act 
was failing to “perform[] or require[] reasonable testing for the presence of lead in the ingredients 
for the Wanabana products at issue prior to the products being sold or otherwise provided to 
Plaintiffs.”  If Navis had performed (or required Austrofood or Wanabana to perform) such testing 
before the Fruit Pouch was distributed, “unsafe levels of lead would have been found and the 
products should not have been delivered to the Plaintiffs.”  Navis’s alleged failure to test the Fruit 
Pouch despite knowing of the risk of lead was part of the chain of causation leading to Plaintiffs’ 
injuries.  Plaintiffs’ negligence allegations are sufficient to survive a motion to dismiss.  

   For these reasons, the Court denies Navis’s motion to dismiss Count XV. 
III.  Counts XVII and XVIII: Breach of Warranties                       
   Plaintiffs bring two claims of breach of warranty against Navis: breach of implied warranty 
and breach of express warranty.                                           
     a.  Breach of Implied Warranty                                     
   Plaintiffs claim that Navis impliedly warranted that the Fruit Pouch was of merchantable 
quality and fit for the ordinary purpose for which it was used: “to be eaten or ingested, including by 
children.”  Under Illinois law, to state a claim for a breach of an implied warranty of merchantability 
Plaintiffs must allege that (1) Navis “sold goods that were not merchantable at the time of sale,” (2) 
Plaintiffs “suffered damages as a result of the defective goods,” and (3) Plaintiffs gave Navis notice 

of the defect.  See Corwin v. Connecticut Valley Arms, Inc., 74 F. Supp. 3d 883, 891 (N.D. Ill. 2014) 
(Pallmeyer, J.) (citing Indus. Hard Chrome, Ltd., 64 F. Supp. 2d at 748 (citing 810 ILCS 5/2–314)).  
Direct notice is not required when “(1) the seller has actual knowledge of the defect of the particular 
product; or (2) a consumer plaintiff suffers a personal injury.”  In re McDonald's French Fries Litig., 503 
F.Supp.2d 953, 956 (N.D. Ill. 2007) (Bucklo, J.).  Because Plaintiffs allege personal injuries as a result 
of their child consuming the Fruit Pouch, the Complaint sufficiently pleads an exception to the 
notice requirement.  Likewise, by suing for personal injury, Plaintiffs are excepted from the privity of 
contract requirement in a breach of implied warranty claim.  See Perona v. Volkswagen of America, Inc., 
292 Ill.App.3d 59, 64, 225 Ill.Dec. 868, 684 N.E.2d 859 (1997).           
   Navis argues that in cases claiming breach of implied warranty for sealed products sold by 
nonmanufacturing parties, Illinois law “supports” transferring such liability to the manufacturer, 
citing Warren v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co. of Chicago?.166 Ill. App. 3d 566, 572, 519 N.E.2d 1197, 1201 

(1988).  But the court held in Warren that a customer may pursue a claim for breach of implied 
warranty against a manufacturer, rather than only the immediate seller.  The law does not entitle a 
nonmanufacturer to transfer liability to the manufacturer in a breach of implied warranty claim, as it 
could in a strict products liability claim where the Illinois Seller’s Exception applies. The Illinois 
Commercial Code provides that “a warranty that the goods shall be merchantable is implied in a 
contract for their sale if the seller is a merchant with respect to goods of that kind” unless the seller 
modifies or excludes the warranty.  810 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 5/2-314.    
   Liberally construing the allegations in the Complaint, Navis was part of a network of 
companies that were in the business of selling food and food products.  Plaintiffs allege that Navis, 
through the Wanabana entities, bought the Fruit Pouch from Austrofood and sold it to retailers in 
the United States to be eventually purchased by Plaintiffs.  The fact that Navis is not the original 

manufacturer nor the immediate seller to Plaintiffs is not dispositive of Plaintiffs’ claim.  See Bay 
Valley Foods, LLC v. FFI Grp., LLC, No. 23-cv-14524, 2025 WL 2257356, at *12 (N.D. Ill. Aug. 7, 
2025), reconsideration denied, No. 23-cv-14524, 2025 WL 3089109 (N.D. Ill. Nov. 5, 2025) (Kennelly, 
J.) (finding breach of implied warranty by intermediary distributor where products contained metal 
when they left control of manufacturer, “and accordingly when they passed down the supply 
chain”).  Navis has not modified or disclaimed the implied warranty, which runs with the product at 
issue.  Accordingly, the Court denies Navis’s motion to dismiss Count XVII. 
     b.  Breach of Express Warranty                                     
   Next, Plaintiffs claim Navis expressly warranted that the Fruit Pouch was of merchantable 
quality and fit for its ordinary purpose because Navis “labeled” the Fruit Pouches packaging with a 
list of ingredients which failed to include “the presence of unsafe levels of poisonous and otherwise 
hazardous lead.”  Plaintiffs do not link the particular statements to any individual Defendant.  

Instead, Plaintiffs allege identical conduct by Wanabana, Austrofood, and S&S Negocios Asociados 
Mayoristas Negasmart S.A (“Negasmart”), the supplier of ground cinnamon used to manufacture 
the Fruit Pouch.                                                          
   A similar case in this district, Ibarolla v. Nutrex Research, Inc., No. 12-cv-4848, 2012 WL 
5381236 (N.D. Ill. Oct. 31, 2012) (Aspen, J.), is persuasive.  In Ibarolla, the plaintiff alleged that both 
the manufacturer and a seller of certain nutritional supplements made promises and representations 
about the effectiveness of the supplements.  The plaintiff did not link specific statements to a 
specific defendant.  Id. at *7.  The court concluded that the plaintiff had impermissibly treated 
different defendants as “identical” when “there [was] no basis for presuming that they made 
identical representations to [p]laintiff.”  Id.  Plaintiffs cannot treat Wanabana, Austrofood, 
Negasmart, and Navis as one, but must identify specific representations made by Navis to state an 
express warranty claim.  They “must identify what representations were made by [Navis]” to 

determine whether they amount to express warranties.  Id.  Because they failed to do so, the Court 
dismisses Count XVIII.                                                    
IV.  Count XIX: Family Expense Act                                      
   Plaintiffs claim to bring the entire action pursuant to the Family Expense Act due to the 
proximate result of one or more, or all, of the negligent acts or omissions of Navis.  Navis argues 
that the Family Expense Act is not a standalone cause of action and that, since all underlying claims 
fail, this one must as well.                                              
   The Family Expense Act gives parents a cause of action against a tortfeasor who, by injuring 
their child, causes them to incur medical expenses.  Bauer v. Memorial Hospital, 377 Ill. App. 3d 895, 
992, 879 N.E.2d 478, 502, (5th Dist. 2007).  The Illinois Supreme Court recognized that this cause 
of action belongs to the parents, and “if the parents are not entitled to recover, neither is the child.”  
Bauer, 879 N.E.2d at 502.  Plaintiffs have adequately plead that their child sustained injuries and that 

they incurred medical expenses for her treatment.  And as explained above, Plaintiffs have stated a 
claim for negligence and breach of implied warranty of merchantability.  Because these claims 
survive, Plaintiffs’ Family Expense Act claim is not a standalone action and may go forward.  
Accordingly, the Court denies Navis’s motion to dismiss Count XIX.        
CONCLUSION 
    For the reasons stated herein, the Court denies Navis’s motion to dismiss as to Counts XV, 
XVI, and XIX.  The Court grants Navis’s motion to dismiss as to Count XVI with prejudice, as 
amendment would be futile, and as to Count XVIII without prejudice [115]. 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 
Date: 2/6/2026                                HOLLY 
                                  Entered:                         
                                         SHARON JOHNSON COLEMAN 
                                         United States District Judge