:                      Southern District of Texas 
                                                                     ENTERED 
                                                                   February 17, 2026 
                IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT      Nathan Ochsner, Clerk 
                FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF TEXAS 
                            HOUSTON DIVISION 

MAKAYLA MOSS,                            § 
                                         § 
       Plaintiff,                        §                    
                                         § 
V.                                       §       Civil Action No. H-25-4494 
                                         § 
SLSCO, LTD.  & MODCORR, LLC,             § 
                                         § 
       Defendants.                       § 
                                   ORDER 
     Pending  before  the  Court  is  Defendants’  Motion  to  Transfer  Venue 
(Document No. 12). Having considered the motion, submissions, and applicable law, 
the Court determines that the motion should be granted. 
                            I.  BACKGROUND 
     This  case  involves  alleged  employment  discrimination.  Plaintiff Makayla 
Moss (“Plaintiff”) was hired by Defendants SLSCO, Ltd. (““SLSCO”) and ModCorr, 
LLC (“ModCorr’) (collectively “Defendants”) to manage trade show and marketing 
operations. Plaintiff alleges that she was retaliated against, excluded from meetings, 
and later disciplined for being lesbian and open about her same-sex relationship with 
her African American partner.! 

     ' See Plaintiff's Complaint, Document No.  1, Exhibit A at 1 (Statement of Facts). 

     Based on the foregoing,  on  September  18,  2025, Plaintiff filed  suit in this 

Court, pursuant to federal question jurisdiction, asserting a claim against Defendants 
for violations of “Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.” On January 29, 2026, 
Defendants moved to transfer venue to the Galveston Division of the United States 
District Court for the Southern District of Texas.?  On February 2, 2026, Plaintiff 
responded in opposition.’ 
                          Il.  LAW & ANALYSIS 
     Defendants  contend  that  venue  should  be  transferred  pursuant  to  “the 
mandatory forum-selection clause in Plaintiffs employment offer letter[.]”° Plaintiff 
contends  that  the  motion  to  transfer  should  be  denied  contending  that  “public- 
interest  factors  strongly weigh  against transfer.” The  Court  construes  all pro se 
filings liberally. See Erickson v. Paradus, 551 U.S. 89, 94 (2007). 
     The  Supreme  Court  has  long  held  that  a  forum  selection  clause  can  be 
enforced by a motion to transfer. See Atlantic Marine Const.  Co., Inc. v.  U.S. Dist. 

      Plaintiff's Complaint, Document No. 1, Exhibit 2 at 1 (Civil Cover Sheet). 
     3 See Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No. 12 at 1. 
     4 Plaintiff's  Response  in  Opposition  to  Defendants’ Motion  to  Transfer  Venue, 
Document No. 13 at 1. 
     > Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No. 12 at 2. 
     6 Plaintiff's Response  in  Opposition  to Defendants’ Motion  to  Transfer  Venue, 
Document No. 13 at 2.

Court for  W.  Dist.  of Tex.,  571  U.S. 49,  51  (2013).  When a valid forum selection 
clause  is  found,  “that  forum-selection  [clause]  should  control  except  in  unusual 
cases.”  Id.  The  Fifth  Circuit  generally  recognizes  four  cases  in  which  a  forum 
selection clause does not control: “where (1) the incorporation of the forum selection 
clause into the agreement was the product of fraud or overreaching; (2) the party 
seeking to escape enforcement ‘will for all practical purposes be deprived of his day 
in court’ because of the grave inconvenience or unfairness of the selected forum; (3) 
the fundamental unfairness of the chosen law will deprive the plaintiff of a remedy; 
or (4) enforcement of the forum selection clause would contravene a strong public 
policy of the forum state.” Haynsworth v.  The Corporation,  121  F.3d 959 (Sth Cir. 
1997)  (citing  Carnival  Cruise Lines  v.  Shute,  499  U.S.  585,  595  (1991)).  Most 
pertinent here, the Fifth Circuit has held that “the closely-related doctrine may under 
limited circumstances bind non-signatories to a contract’s forum selection clause[.]” 
Franlink Incorporated v. BA CE Services, Incorporated, 50 F 4th 432, 445 (Sth Cir. 
2022). 
      Here, Defendants contend that the forum selection clause is “presumptively 
valid and enforceable” and that “ModCorr may enforce the forum-selection clause 
under the closely-related doctrine[.]’”’ In response, Plaintiff contends that the present 

      7 Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No. 12 at 4, 6.

motion should be denied contending that “Plaintiff resides in Houston . . . Transfer 
would impair access to justice . .  . Title VII provides independent venue rights . . . 
the offer letter was non-negotiated . .  . both Defendants conduct substantial business 
_in Houston ... ModCorr was not a signatory to the employment offer letter . . . [and] 
Defendants have not shown extraordinary circumstances justifying transfer[.]”* The 
Court will  consider,  in turn,  each Defendants’  arguments pertaining to the  forum 
selection clause. 
      A.  Defendant SLSCO 
      Defendants contend that a valid forum selection clause exists.” In response, 
Plaintiff contends that the Defendants “have not demonstrated extraordinary public- 
interest circumstances warranting transfer.”!° Plaintiffs argument represents a clear 
misunderstanding of the requirements under the law. The Supreme Court has long 
held that the plaintiff “as the party defying the forum-selection clause, has the burden 
of establishing  that  a  transfer  to  the  forum  for  which  the  parties  bargained  is 
unwarranted.” Atlantic Marine Const.  Co., 571 U.S. at   51.  A review of the record in 
this  matter  reveals  that  a  contract  was  entered  into  by  Defendant  SLSCO  and 

      8  Plaintiff's  Response  in  Opposition  to  Defendants’ Motion  to  Transfer  Venue, 
Document No. 13 at 2-5. 
        See Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No. 12 at 4. 
      10 Plaintiff's Opposition to Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No. 
28 at 5.

Plaintiff providing that  “[e]xclusive venue  for  any  litigation  between the parties 
hereto shall be in Galveston County, Texas” and that “[t]he parties . . . specifically 
consent to the jurisdiction of the State District Courts of Galveston County and the 
United  States  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  Texas,  Galveston 
Division.”!! Furthermore, the record reveals that Plaintiff provides no contentions as 

to any of the Fifth Circuit’s four recognized cases where a forum selection clause 
does not control.!* Based on the foregoing, and the Supreme Court’s clear guidance 
that, absent unusual circumstances, a forum selection clause controls, the Court finds 
that the forum selection clause should be enforced. As such, the Court finds that the 
matter should be transferred with respect to Defendant SLSCO. The Court will now 
consider the forum selection clause as it applies to Defendant ModCorr. 

      1  Defendants’  Motion  to  Transfer  Venue,  Document  No.  12,  Exhibit  1  at  4 
(Employment Contract). 
      12 The  Court notes Plaintiffs  arguments  in her response to Defendants’  current 
motion. See Plaintiffs Response in Opposition to Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, 
Document No. 13 at 2-5. However, a review of Plaintiffs contentions reveal that Plaintiff 
is unable to assert that any of the Fifth Circuit’s four recognized cases where a forum 
selection  clause  does  not apply here.  Namely,  the  Court notes that this  Court and the 
Galveston Division of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas, 
_are in the same district and apply the same laws. As such, there is no conflict of laws nor 
concern with the familiarity of governing laws. To the extent Plaintiff contends that the 
forum selection clause is invalid because “the offer letter was non-negotiated[,]” the Court 
notes the clear guidance of the Fifth Circuit that the incorporation of a forum selection 
clause  through  fraud  may  invalidate  said  clause,  but  further  notes  a  clear  distinction 
between  a  fraudulent  contract  and  non-negotiated  contract.  Plaintiff's  Response  in 
Opposition to Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No. 13 at 4.

     B.  Defendant ModCorr 
     Defendants contend that ModCorr “may enforce the forum-selection clause 
under  the  closely-related  doctrine[.]”!>  In  response,  Plaintiff  contends  that 
“ModCorr was  not  a  signatory  to the  employment offer  letter”  and that “[e]ven 
assuming arguendo that ModCorr may attempt to invoke the forum-selection clause 
under a  ‘closely related’  theory, the  Court must still  independently weigh public 
interest factors as to both Defendants.”'* A review of the record in this matter reveals 
that Defendants “share common ownership and operate within the same corporate 
structure[.]”!> Based on the foregoing, and the clear guidance of the Fifth Circuit 
with respect to the closely related doctrine, the Court finds that the two Defendants 
in this matter are closely related.!® As such, the Court finds that the forum selection 
clause should be enforced with respect to Defendant ModCorr, and that Defendants’ 
motion should be granted accordingly. 

     13 Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No. 12 at 6. 
     4 Plaintiff's Response  in  Opposition  to Defendants’ Motion  to  Transfer  Venue, 
Document No. 13 at 4. 
     '5 Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No.  12 at 6; see Defendants’ 
Motion to Transfer Venue, Document No. 12, Exhibit 2 at 1 (Texas Franchise Report). 
     16 With respect to Plaintiffs contention that the public factors must be independently 
weighed, the Court incorporates its previous  findings and reasoning and notes that any 
applicable public factors are identical with respect to both Defendants.

                             II. CONCLUSION 
     Based on the foregoing, the Court hereby 
     ORDERS that Defendants’ Motion to Transfer Venue (Document No.  12) is 
GRANTED. The Court further 
     ORDERS that this  case is TRANSFERRED to the United  States District 
Court for the Southern District of Texas, Galveston Division. 
     SIGNED at Houston, Texas, on this_{    7  day of February, 2026. 

                                         <Pza\  Nate 
                                                  DAVID HITTNER 
                                              United States District Judge