2026 IL App (2d) 250239-U
                                          No. 2-25-0239
                                  Order filed February 26, 2026

       NOTICE: This order was filed under Supreme Court Rule 23(b) and is not
       precedent except in the limited circumstances allowed under Rule 23(e)(1).


                                             IN THE

                                APPELLATE COURT OF ILLINOIS

                                      SECOND DISTRICT


               THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,

                                          v.
                             LAYTH BLOCK, Defendant-Appellant.


                        Appeal from the Circuit Court of Kendall County.
                          Honorable Lisa F. Accardi, Judge, Presiding.
                                        No. 23-DV-172


       JUSTICE HUTCHINSON delivered the judgment of the court.
       Presiding Justice Kennedy and Justice Jorgensen concurred in the judgment.

                                            ORDER

¶1     Held: The evidence was sufficient to sustain defendant’s conviction for domestic battery
             by insulting or provoking contact; affirmed.

¶2     After a bench trial, defendant Layth Block was found guilty of misdemeanor domestic

battery (720 ILCS 5/12-3.2(a)(2) (West 2022) (insulting or provoking contact)) and was sentenced

to 12 months’ court supervision. He appeals and contends that the State’s evidence did not disprove

that he acted in self-defense and was insufficient because the complaining victim “was not a

reliable witness.” We affirm.
¶3     At trial, Brian Kapp testified that he rented a room to defendant inside a single-family home

in Joliet. Kapp also lived in the house. At some time in the late evening on December 13, 2025,

Kapp heard a commotion in the garage and went to investigate. Kapp saw defendant by the garage

door. Earlier, Kapp had moved defendant’s belongings outside in front of the garage. Defendant

confronted Kapp in the living room about “messing with [his] stuff ***.” Kapp responded that it

was because defendant wasn’t paying his rent and was causing “too many issues” with the other

tenants. Defendant put his hand on Kapp’s throat and forced Kapp to the ground while choking

him. Defendant made statements about people messing with his things, and repeatedly asked Kapp

if he wanted defendant “to spare [his] life.” While Kapp was on the ground, defendant briefly took

his grip off of Kapp’s throat. Kapp yelled out for help and defendant said, “oh, no, you don’t want

to do that,” and pulled out a knife and pointed it at Kapp’s face. One of the tenants, Regina, turned

on a light in the kitchen, and defendant got off of Kapp and left. Kapp was scared for his life, and

his neck was red where defendant’s fingers had been.

¶4     Defendant testified that he came home from work late at night, saw his stuff in front of the

garage, and entered the home through the “doggie door.” Inside the house, defendant recognized

Kapp in the darkness by his stature. Per defendant, Kapp was holding something in his left hand;

“it ended up being a phone” but “[a]t the time [defendant] didn’t know if it was a taser, if it was a

gun, [or] if it was a knife.” Defendant was scared and stated that Kapp moved towards defendant

in an aggressive manner without saying anything. Defendant then “brought [Kapp] down to the

ground” in a “[j]ujitsu style *** controlled manner.” More specifically, defendant “wrapped [his]

leg around, like taking control of [Kapp’s] arms” and defendant also “wrapped [his] leg around

[Kapp’s] back leg, tripping him down to the ground and controlling him so nobody was hurt.” This

is called a “leg trap or something like that” and defendant was particularly careful so that Kapp



                                                -2-
did not hit his head on the ground. Defendant told Kapp to “relax” while defendant attempted to

determine if Kapp “had a gun or if he had a knife or a taser.” Defendant conceded that he was

carrying a knife in his coat, but claimed he never brandished it. Defendant admitted that he might

have touched Kapp’s throat when he was “bringing [Kapp] down to the ground” but denied

choking him. Defendant also admitted that he had “pinn[ed]” Kapp and may have been kneeling

on him, but defendant denied using his body weight to secure Kapp. When asked why he took

Kapp down to the floor, defendant stated his rationale: “Because I was in immediate danger at least

is what I assumed.” According to defendant, when Regina turned on the kitchen light, the police

also “happened to be there” and defendant was arrested. Defendant estimated that he held Kapp

on the ground for between five and 30 seconds.

¶5     On cross-examination, defendant stated that he could not see Kapp because it was dark,

but paradoxically defendant could tell that Kapp’s “demeanor” was aggressive like “a UFC

fight[er]” after the bell rings to start the round. After he pinned Kapp to the ground, defendant

attempted to “mitigate the weapon” in Kapp’s possession. Instead, defendant determined the object

in Kapp’s hand was a cell phone. Then, defendant said, “[b]efore I knew it, I was in handcuffs and

on my way to the police station.” The trial court found that Kapp was credible and a household

member, and that defendant was not credible; the court entered a judgment of conviction

accordingly.

¶6     On appeal, defendant contends the evidence was insufficient. He claims that he

“subdue[d]” Kapp “without injury,” that he “reasonably perceived an armed threat in the

darkness,” and that Kapp’s “more damning account was unreliable and uncorroborated.” These

arguments are unpersuasive.




                                               -3-
¶7      We confess that we are not certain what defendant means when he says Kapp’s retelling

was “more damning,” but we understand defendant’s general point: he disputes Kapp’s version of

events and believes that “rejecting [defendant’s] testimony as incredible was an error.” Defendant’s

arguments all orbit the same premise, urging that we should disbelieve Kapp, and in so doing,

defendant reveals his arguments to be misguided. As is often said, we are a court of review, not

first view, and we are not free to reweigh the evidence at defendant’s invitation. That is:

        “When considering a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, it is not the function of

        a reviewing court to retry the defendant. Rather, in a bench trial, it is for the trial judge,

        sitting as the trier of fact, to determine the credibility of witnesses, to weigh evidence and

        draw reasonable inferences therefrom, and to resolve any conflicts in the evidence. A

        reviewing court will not reverse a conviction simply because the evidence is contradictory

        or because the defendant claims that a witness was not credible.” (Citations omitted.)

        People v. Siguenza-Brito, 235 Ill. 2d 213, 228 (2009).

Likewise, “[i]t remains the firm holding of [our supreme] court that the testimony of a single

witness, if positive and credible, is sufficient to convict, even though it is contradicted by the

defendant.” Id.

¶8      Unlike defendant, we find nothing inherently improbable in our reading of the transcript of

Kapp’s testimony, and therefore we can only defer to the trial court’s credibility findings, as it,

unlike us, saw and heard the victim’s testimony alongside defendant’s. To the extent defendant

claims that the trial court failed to fully consider his self-defense claim, the trial court is presumed

to know the law and to have applied it properly and we find nothing unreasonable in its analysis.

See generally People v. Howery, 178 Ill. 2d 1, 32 (1997). The trial court’s explanation indicates

that it found defendant was the initial aggressor, not Kapp, and that defendant’s use of force—by



                                                 -4-
his own admission, restraining Kapp by the neck—was objectively unreasonable. There was also

no evidence that Kapp was a dangerous character who quickly resorted to violence or was known

to carry deadly weapons such as a gun, or a knife, or a taser. Cf. People v. Heintz, 2026 IL

131340, ¶ 53. Regardless, none of defendant’s analysis disputes either of the essential elements of

this offense, namely (1) that Kapp was a household member, and (2) that the conduct Kapp

described was clearly contact of an insulting and provoking nature. 720 ILCS 5/12-3.2(a)(2).

Defendant’s notation that Kapp did not suffer any serious injury is beside the point. See, e.g.,

People v. Green, 2011 IL App (2d) 091123, ¶ 23 (“[t]he domestic battery statute’s plain language

defines the offense in terms of contact that insults or provoked the victim, and the contact does not

need to cause physical injury”). The reason the law punishes even minimal conduct of this type is

because of its potential to escalate into much more serious and violent offenses, especially between

family and household members.

¶9     Defendant points out that there were no other witnesses who testified, but he also notes,

citing People v. Smith, 185 Ill. 2d 532, 541 (1999), that one witness’s testimony is adequate to

sustain a criminal conviction. Kapp’s testimony was positive and clear, and the trial court found

him credible. After carefully reviewing the record, we determine that a reasonable trier of fact

could find the act of choking and restraining the victim (and, further, brandishing a knife and

asking the victim if he wished his life to be “spare[d]”) was contact of an insulting and provoking

nature to a household member. See People v. Davidson, 2023 IL 127538, ¶ 16. In sum, we affirm

the judgment of the circuit court of Kendall County.

¶ 10   Affirmed.




                                                -5-