IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                          
           FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF ILLINOIS                         
                      EASTERN DIVISION                                   

JAMES O’LEARY,                                                           

Plaintiff and Cross-Defendant,                                           
                                   Case No. 25-cv-03290                  
v.                                                                       
                                   Judge Mary M. Rowland                 
DANIEL J. EDELMAN, INC. a                                                
Delaware Corporation, and RICHARD                                        
EDELMAN, Individually,                                                   

Defendants and Cross-Plaintiffs.                                         

              MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER                               
 Plaintiff  and  Cross-Defendant  James  O’Leary  sued  Defendants  Daniel  J. 
Edelman, Inc. (“Edelman”) and Richard Edelman and (collectively, “Defendants”), 
alleging that Defendants refused to pay O’Leary certain incentive compensation that 
O’Leary was allegedly owed after resigning from Edelman. [1-1]. O’Leary brought 
claims  for  breach  of  contract  and  violations  of  the  Illinois  Wage  Payment  and 
Collection Act (the “IWPCA”). Edelman filed a counterclaim for breach of contract, 
alleging that O’Leary signed a waiver and release of claims upon his resignation and 
that O’Leary breached that release by filing this lawsuit. [16]. O’Leary moved to 
dismiss Edelman’s counterclaim and voluntarily dismissed his own claims against 
Edelman  [31].  Edelman  seeks  to  maintain  its  breach  of  contract  action  against 
O’Leary. Before the Court now is O’Leary’s motion to dismiss Edelman’s counterclaim 
alleging breach of contract [29]. For the reasons herein, O’Leary’s motion is granted. 
The Counterclaim is dismissed without prejudice.                          
   I.  Background                                                        
 The following factual allegations taken from the Edelman’s complaint (“Counter 
Compl.”) are accepted as true for the purposes of the motion to dismiss. See Lax v. 

Mayorkas, 20 F.4th 1178, 1181 (7th Cir. 2021). The Court also references O’Leary’s 
complaint (“Compl.”) and the parties’ waiver and release (the “Agreement”), which 
Edelman’s  counterclaim  incorporates  by  reference  See  Fin.  Fiduciaries,  LLC  v. 
Gannett Co., 46 F.4th 654, 663 (7th Cir. 2022 (“[A] court may consider documents that 
are (1) referenced in the plaintiff's complaint, (2) concededly authentic, and (3) central 
to the plaintiff's claim.”).                                              
 O’Leary worked as an executive for Defendants, and in October 2014, Edelman 

accepted O’Leary into its Executive Long-Term Compensation Plan (“LTIP”). Counter 
Compl. ¶¶ 8-9. Under the LTIP, executives received certain “Units,” which vested 
over time. Counter Compl. ¶ 11. When an executive like O’Leary left Defendants’ 
employ, a plan administrator determined whether the executive’s departure was 
approved or unapproved. Counter Compl. ¶ 23. If unapproved, the executive would 
forfeit all Units. Counter Compl. ¶ 34.                                   

 Separate from Units, Defendants also offered O’Leary the opportunity to own 
shares  of  the  company.  Counter  Compl.  ¶  14.  Defendants  can  repurchase  an 
executive’s shares following their departure from the company. Counter Compl. ¶ 15.  
 O’Leary  resigned  effective  January  13,  2023,  and  Defendants  approved  his 
resignation that morning. Compl. ¶ 3; Counter Compl. ¶ 26. After Defendants learned 
that O’Leary was leaving to work for a competitor, they redesignated his departure 
as unapproved. Counter Compl. ¶ 26.                                       
 On June 21, 2023, O’Leary signed the Agreement, under which Defendants agreed 

to  pay  him  for  his  shares  (but  not  his  Units).  Counter  Compl.  ¶¶  29,  34.  The 
Agreement, which described O’Leary as “Shareholder,” further provided:    
    Shareholder waives, releases, and forever discharges Daniel J. Edelman 
    Holdings,  Inc.,  and  its  parents,  subsidiaries…shareholders,  officers, 
    directors…from any and all rights, causes of action, claims or demands, 
    whether express or implied…which Shareholder may have against the    
    Company and/or Company releases, arising up to the date of this      
    Agreement  out  of  Shareholder’s  ownership  of  Shares,  the       
    Company’s  repurchase  of  the  Shares,  any  agreements  between  the 
    Parties  related  to  the  Shares…Shareholder  acknowledges  that  the 
    Company (including all Company Releasees) has not: (a) breached any  
    express or implied contract with Shareholder; or (b) otherwise acted 
    unlawfully toward Shareholder…Shareholder further understands that   
    this  Waiver  and  Release  Agreement  includes  a  release  of  all 
    known and unknown claims to date.                                    

 Counter Compl. ¶ 30 (emphasis added).                                   
 In addition, Paragraph 5 of the Agreement provides that:                
    Shareholder agrees that, in the event that any claim, suit, or action is 
    commenced by Shareholder . . . arising out of any charge, claim, or cause 
    of  action  which,  by  this  Agreement,  Shareholder  is  releasing,  this 
    Agreement shall constitute a complete defense to any such claims . . . In 
    the  event  that  Shareholder  breaches  this  agreement  by  suing  the 
    Company  .  .  .  for  any  released  claim,  Shareholder  shall  pay  the 
    Company’s . . . reasonable attorneys’ fees and other costs incurred by 
    them as a result of Shareholder’s . . . suit.                        

 [16-1] ¶ 5. Edelman alleges that “O’Leary understood the [Agreement] contained 
a general release of all claims.” Counter Compl. ¶ 33.                    
 On February 25, 2025, O’Leary sued Edelman in state court, alleging Edelman 
violated the terms of the LTIP when Edelman redesignated O’Leary’s departure as 
unapproved. See [1-1] ¶¶ 38-51. Edelman removed that action to federal court. [1]. 
Edelman subsequently filed the counterclaim that is the subject of this opinion, 
alleging that O’Leary’s lawsuit violated the terms of the Agreement. [16].  

 Shortly thereafter, O’Leary notified the Court of his plans to voluntarily dismiss 
his suit so that he could refile his lawsuit in Delaware state court. See [24]. O’Leary 
dismissed his claims on August 14, 2025. [31].                            
  II.  Standard                                                          
 “To survive a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6), the complaint must provide 
enough factual information to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face and 
raise  a  right  to  relief  above  the  speculative  level.”  Haywood  v.  Massage  Envy 

Franchising, LLC, 887 F.3d 329, 333 (7th Cir. 2018) (quoting Camasta v. Jos. A. Bank 
Clothiers, Inc., 761 F.3d 732, 736 (7th Cir. 2014)); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a)(2) 
(requiring a complaint to contain a “short and plain statement of the claim showing 
that  the  pleader  is  entitled  to  relief”).  A  court  deciding  a  Rule  12(b)(6)  motion 
“construe[s] the complaint in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, accept[s] all 
well-pleaded facts as true, and draw[s] all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff’s 

favor.”  Lax, 20 F.4th at 1181. However, the court need not accept as true “statements 
of law or unsupported conclusory factual allegations.” Id. (quoting Bilek v. Fed. Ins. 
Co., 8 F.4th 581, 586 (7th Cir. 2021)). “While detailed factual allegations are not 
necessary to survive a motion to dismiss, [the standard] does require ‘more than mere 
labels and conclusions or a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action to 
be considered adequate.’” Sevugan v. Direct Energy Servs., LLC, 931 F.3d 610, 614 
(7th Cir. 2019) (quoting Bell v. City of Chicago, 835 F.3d 736, 738 (7th Cir. 2016)). 
 Dismissal  for  failure  to  state  a  claim  is  proper  “when  the  allegations  in  a 

complaint, however true, could not raise a claim of entitlement to relief.” Bell Atl. 
Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 558 (2007). Deciding the plausibility of the claim is 
“a context-specific task that requires the reviewing court to draw on its judicial 
experience and common sense.” McCauley v. City of Chicago, 671 F.3d 611, 616 (7th 
Cir. 2011) (quoting Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 679 (2009)).         
 These pleading standards apply equally to counterclaims. See Cozzi Iron & Metal, 
Inc. v. U.S. Office Equip., Inc., 250 F.3d 570, 574 (7th Cir. 2001).      

 III.  Analysis                                                          
 O’Leary argues that Edelman’s counterclaim should be dismissed because  (1) to 
the  extent  the  Agreement  is  relevant  to  O’Leary’s  now  dismissed  claims,  the 
Agreement could function only as an affirmative defense, not as an independent 
source for an action for breach of contract, (2) Edelman has not adequately alleged 
that O’Leary’s breach caused any damages, and (3) O’Leary’s complaint was not a 

breach of the Agreement.                                                  
        I.  Whether the Agreement is a release or a covenant not to sue  
           is ambiguous.                                                 

 Under Illinois law, “[r]elease is an affirmative defense [that] must be raised in a 
party's responsive pleading.” Caudill Seed & Warehouse Co. v. Rose, 868 F.3d 558, 
560 (7th Cir. 2017). Illinois law distinguishes between a release of claim on the one 
hand, which only gives a Defendant an affirmative defense, and a covenant not to sue 
on the other, which when violated can form the basis of a breach of contract claim. 
See Isbell v. Allstate Ins. Co., 418 F.3d 788, 797 (7th Cir. 2005) (applying Illinois law); 
see also Pate v. City of Sesser, 393 N.E.2d 1146, 1149 (Ill. App. Ct. 1979) (“A release 

extinguishes a cause of action whereas a covenant not to sue affects only the right to 
bring suit and not the cause of action itself.”).                         
 O’Leary  argues  that  the  Agreement  functions  only  as  a  release.  In  support, 
O’Leary relies primarily on Isbell, where an employee signed an agreement that 
“release[d], waive[d], and forever discharge[d] Allstate ... from any and all liability, 
actions, charges, causes of action, demands, damages, entitlements or claims for relief 
or remuneration of any kind whatsoever, ... including ... any claim for age or other 

types of discrimination prohibited under [the ADA].” 418 F.3d at 797. The employee 
subsequently sued under the ADA, and the district court granted Allstate summary 
judgment on its breach of contract claim premised on the release agreement. Id. The 
Seventh  Circuit  reversed,  explaining  that  the  agreement  did  “not  amount  to  a 
covenant not to sue, but rather is a release from liability for any potential past 
claims.” Id. That agreement gave “Allstate a defense that prevent[ed] [the plaintiff] 

from winning,” the Seventh Circuit reasoned, but it did “not contain plain language 
that amounts to an agreement not to sue.” Id. Accordingly, the agreement “d[id] not 
result in breach upon the filing of a [released claim].” Id.              
 O’Leary argues that the same follows here. Indeed, the plain language of the 
agreement indicates that the parties intended it only as a release from liability for 
past claims. See [16-1] at 2 (explaining that the Agreement would waive O’Leary’s 
claims “arising up to the date of this Agreement.”); id. at 3 (the Agreement “does not 
constitute a waiver of any rights or claims that may arise after” the Agreement). And 
Paragraph 5 of the Agreement provides that if O’Leary brings a released claim that, 

the “Agreement shall constitute a complete defense.” Id ¶ 5.              
 But that is not all Paragraph 5 says. It further provides that “[i]n the event 
[O’Leary] breaches this Agreement by suing [Defendants] . . . for any released claim, 
[O’Leary] shall pay [Defendants’] reasonable attorneys’ fees and other costs incurred 
by them as a result of [the claim].” [16-1] ¶ 5 (emphasis added). While not an explicit 
covenant not to sue, this language could constitute an implicit promise not to sue. 
Under this reading, if O’Leary “breaches” the Agreement by suing for a released 

claim,  the  Agreement  provides  Defendants  with  the  affirmative  right  to  seek 
reasonable attorneys’ fees. O’Leary’s reading is that because the promise resides in a 
contract that provides Defendants with an affirmative defense, Defendants cannot 
seek the affirmative relief that the Agreement entitles them to. But accepting this 
argument would deny Defendants the full benefit of their bargain, namely fees.1 
 At a minimum, the exact remedy that Paragraph 5 affords Defendants in the event 

O’Leary files a released claim is ambiguous. “A contract is ambiguous if its terms are 


1 The case law on this issue is not as straightforward as either party presents it. While some courts 
have indicated that express, explicit language promising not to sue is required to find a covenant, see 
Isaacs v. Caterpillar, Inc., 702 F. Supp. 711, 713 (C.D. Ill. 1988), others have suggested that a release 
which provides for damages in the event a released claim is brought could function as a covenant not 
to sue. E.g., Davis v. Ret. Plan of Philbro Animal Health Corp., 845 F. Supp. 2d 915, 922 (S.D. Ill. 2012) 
(dismissing counterclaim based on release, noting, among other things, that a covenant not to sue 
“would provide for damages”); Bukuras v. Mueller Group, LLC, 592 F.3d 255, 266–267 (1st Cir. 2010) 
(applying Massachusetts law and finding that a release was not a covenant not to sue because “the 
Agreement [the counter-defendant] signed contained no fee-shifting provision that would have entitled 
[counter-plaintiff] to recover its costs or fees in the event of a breach.”). 
indefinite or have a double meaning.” Lewitton v. ITA Software, Inc., 585 F.3d 377, 
379 (7th Cir. 2009). Under one reading of Paragraph 5, Defendants have only an 
affirmative  defense  to  a  suit;  under  another,  Defendants  have  a  right  to  seek 

affirmative relief. It may be that this ambiguity can be resolved through extrinsic 
evidence indicating that the parties meant only to sign a release. Either way, this 
ambiguity cannot be resolved at the pleadings stage. See PMC Cas. Corp. v. Virginia 
Sur. Co., No. 24 C 7795, 2025 WL 1685293, at *4 (N.D. Ill. June 16, 2025) (citing 
Echo, Inc. v. Whitson Co., Inc., 121 F.3d 1099, 1104 (7th Cir. 1997) (ambiguities in 
contract create question of fact that cannot be resolved on a motion to dismiss). 
Accordingly, the Court cannot find, as O’Leary asserts, that the Agreement provides 

only an affirmative defense that cannot form the basis of a breach of contract claim.  
       II.  Whether O’Leary’s contract claim was released is likewise    
           ambiguous.                                                    

 O’Leary next argues that even if Edelman can bring a breach of contract based on 
the Agreement, Edelman has failed to allege that O’Leary breached the Agreement 
by filing this lawsuit. O’Leary’s complaint contained two claims: a breach of contract 
claim and an IWPCA claim. The parties agree that the IWPCA claim was not (and 
legally could not be) released under the Agreement. [36] at 10. They dispute whether 
O’Leary’s contract claim, premised on Defendants allegedly denying him Units under 
the LTIP, was released by the Agreement.                                  
 Paragraph  2  of  the  Agreement  specifically  provides  that  by  signing  the 
Agreement, O’Leary released all claims “arising up to the date of this Agreement out 
of Shareholder’s ownership of Shares[.]” [16-1] ¶ 2. If that were all the Agreement 
said, it would be clear that O’Leary’s lawsuit — which arose out the LTIP Units, not 
shares — was not released by the Agreement.                               
 But Paragraph 12 of the Agreement separately provides that the Agreement 

“includes a release of all known and unknown claims to date.” [16-1] ¶ 12. Edelman 
alleges that O’Leary knew about his claim arising from LTIP Units at the time the 
Agreement was executed. See [36] at 11. If true, Paragraph 12’s general language 
would release O’Leary’s LTIP breach of contract claim.                    
 O’Leary  responds  that  there  is  no  ambiguity,  and  that  the  specific  release 
language in Paragraph 2 controls. See [30] at 10-11. It is a general rule in contract 
interpretation that “specific provisions trump general ones.” Aircraft Owners & Pilots 

Ass'n v. Hinson, 102 F.3d 1421, 1425 (7th Cir. 1996). But the Illinois Supreme Court 
has explained that where a contract contains a specific release and a general release, 
and where both parties were aware of an additional claim at the time the release is 
signed, the general release language should be given effect. Farm Credit Bank of St. 
Louis v. Whitlock, 581 N.E.2d 664, 667 (Ill. 1991).2 But contrary to this general 
principle, in Whitlock, the Illinois Supreme Court considered a release that, like here, 

contained plain language indicating the parties meant only to release specific claims. 
Id. The Court held that this specific language was rendered ambiguous by other 


2 O’Leary attempts to distinguish Whitlock because it (1) was decided on summary judgment, (2) did 
not involve a counterclaim, and (3) involved a contract that was ambiguous. See [37] at 10-11. But (a) 
the difference in procedural posture does not affect the rule that Whitlock set forth, (b) it is not clear 
why the absence of a counterclaim would affect the Illinois Supreme Court’s contract interpretation, 
and (c) like in Whitlock, the presence of specific and general release language in the Agreement renders 
the nature of the release ambiguous. Further, nearly all the cases that O’Leary cites where an Illinois 
court held that a specific release governed over a more general release predate the Illinois Supreme 
Court’s decision in Whitlock. See [30] at 10-11.                          
language in the agreement that suggested a broader release. Id. The same follows 
here. Because of the ambiguity between the specific and general release language, 
the Court cannot say at the pleadings stage whether the general release language in 

Paragraph 12 governs O’Leary’s LTIP claim.3                               
      III.  Edelman  has  nonetheless  failed  to  adequately  allege    
           damages.                                                      
 “Damages are an essential element of a breach of contract action, for without 
damages there can be no recovery.” Wexler v. Chubb Nat'l Ins. Co., No. 21-CV-2543, 
2025 WL 1918828, at *3 (N.D. Ill. July 11, 2025) (citing Walker v. Ridgeview Const. 
Co., Inc., 736 N.E.2d 1184, 1187 (Ill. App. Ct. 2000)). O’Leary argues that even if he 
did breach the Agreement, Edelman has failed to allege it was damaged by that 
breach. The Court agrees.                                                 
 Edelman’s sole allegation related to damages is that it “was harmed by O’Leary’s 
breach, including but not limited to being required to defend” against O’Leary’s 
lawsuit. Counter Compl. ¶ 50. As relief, Edelman requests that it be awarded the 
damages “it has suffered, in an amount to be determined, including but not limited 
to the reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in defending” against O’Leary’s 

lawsuit. Counter Compl. at 7.                                             
 But the Agreement only provides for attorneys’ fees that Defendants incur because 
of O’Leary bringing a released claim. [16-1] ¶ 5. As noted, O’Leary brought one 
allegedly released claim for breach of contract and an IWPCA claim, which the parties 


3 The Court notes, however, that at least some Illinois Appellate courts have continued to hold that a 
specific release controls over a more general release even after the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision 
in Whitlock. See Countryman v. Indus. Comm'n, 686 N.E.2d 61, 65 (Ill. App. Ct. 1997) 
agree is not released. Defendants moved to dismiss the non-released IWPCA claim. 
Edelman has not alleged facts showing that it litigated (i.e., suffered damages) 
because  of  O’Leary’s  released  claim.  Defendants  have  not  even  answered  the 

Complaint in this Court.                                                  
 Edelman argues that because O’Leary brought at least one released claim, it can 
recover its attorneys’ fees related to defending all of O’Leary’s claims. [36] at 12. In 
support, Edelman relies on Tuf Racing Prods., Inc. v. Am. Suzuki Motor Corp., where 
a district court noted that in the context of a fee-shifting statute, a party could recover 
for  fees  under  multiple  claims  if  (1)  the  party  “substantially  prevailed”  on  the 
statutory claim that came with fee shifting and (2) the other claims arose under the 

same common core set of facts. No. 94 C 50392, 1999 WL 669226, at *2 (N.D. Ill. Aug. 
27, 1999).                                                                
 Here, any potential award of fees comes not from a statute but from the plain 
language of the Agreement. The Agreement provides that Edelman can recover for 
“reasonable fees” that are “incurred as a result of” “any released claim.” [16-1] ¶ 5. To 
the extent that O’Leary breached the Agreement, he did so only by filing a released 

contract claim. O’Leary’s IWPCA claim was not a breach of the Agreement, so any 
costs Edelman incurred defending that claim are irrelevant to Edelman’s breach 
claim. Because Edelman has not alleged that it incurred costs in defending O’Leary’s 
allegedly released contract claim, Edelman has failed to state a claim for breach of 
contract.                                                                 
      IV.  Conclusion                                                    
 For the stated reasons, O’Leary’s motion to dismiss [29] is granted. 

                                      ENTER: 
                                      NV 
Dated: March 20, 2026                       sg   Vf 

                                                                          12