UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT              April 01, 2026  
                SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF TEXAS              Nathan Ochsner, Clerk
                    GALVESTON DIVISION                                   
REBECCA J. SINGLETON,          §                                         
                               §                                         
     Plaintiff.                §                                         
                               §                                         
V.                             §  CIVIL ACTION NO. 3:23-cv-00349         
                               §                                         
NEWREZ, LLC, et al.,           §                                         
                               §                                         
     Defendants.               §                                         

           MEMORANDUM AND RECOMMENDATION                                 
    Defendant Newrez, LLC has filed a motion for summary judgment. See   
Dkt. 18. Because res judicata bars all claims brought by Plaintiff Rebecca Singleton 
in this lawsuit, I recommend that the motion be granted.                  
                        BACKGROUND                                       
    This is one of three separate lawsuits filed by Singleton concerning the 
alleged wrongful foreclosure of her home in May 2023.                     
    The First Lawsuit (a/k/a the Federal Lawsuit): On September 20,      
2023, Singleton filed this lawsuit against Newrez, Huy Diep, and An Quoc Vu in 
the  149th  District  Court  of  Brazoria  County,  Texas.1  See  Dkt.  1-1.  Singleton 
acknowledges that she had been behind in some of her mortgage payments, but 
claims that she paid Newrez $23,214.18 on May 1, 2023, to reinstate the loan. Even 
so, Newrez foreclosed Singleton’s home on May 2, 2023. In her operative pleading, 
Singleton asserts a cause of action for “illegal foreclosure.” Id. at 6. Newrez timely 
removed this lawsuit to federal court. For convenience, I will refer to the first 
lawsuit as “the Federal Lawsuit.” This is the case currently before the court.  
    The  Second  Lawsuit:  On  January  29,  2024,  Singleton  filed  for 
bankruptcy protection in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern 
District of Texas. As part of the bankruptcy proceedings, Singleton commenced an 

1 Diep and Vu are third-party purchasers of the home at issue.            
adversary proceeding against Newrez, Diep, and Vu. Just a few months later, the 
bankruptcy  judge  dismissed  the  bankruptcy  action  and  also  dismissed  the 
adversary proceeding without prejudice.                                   
    The Third Lawsuit (a/k/a the State Lawsuit): On September 19, 2024,  
Singleton filed another lawsuit in state court. See Singleton v. Vo, No. 130703-cv-
A (412th Judicial District Court of Brazoria County, Texas); Dkt. 18-1. I will refer 
to this case as “the State Lawsuit.” The defendants in the State Lawsuit are identical 
to the defendants in the Federal Lawsuit—Newrez, Diep, and Vu.2 In the State 
Lawsuit, as in the Federal Lawsuit, Singleton alleges that she made a May 1, 2023 
payment to bring her loan current and the May 2, 2023 foreclosure should not have 
taken place. As in the Federal Lawsuit, Singleton seeks to unwind the foreclosure 
sale, a permanent injunction to prevent foreclosure, and monetary damages. It is 
unclear why Singleton filed the State Lawsuit when the Federal Lawsuit asserting 
the same claims was already pending, but the lawyer who filed the State Lawsuit is 
not the same lawyer who filed the Federal Lawsuit.                        
    A few months after the State Lawsuit was filed, the parties agreed to abate 
the State Lawsuit and proceed with the Federal Lawsuit. To that end, the state 
court entered an Agreed Order Abating Case on January 23, 2025, specifying that 
the State Lawsuit is “ABATED pending a final disposition of” the Federal Lawsuit. 
Dkt. 19-10 at 1.                                                          
    In June 2025, Newrez’s counsel emailed Singleton’s counsel, explaining that 
Newrez planned to file a motion to reopen the State Lawsuit. See Dkt. 22-1 at 3. 
Newrez’s counsel inquired whether Singleton was opposed or unopposed to the 
proposed motion. Singleton’s counsel responded: “So why did Newrez change their 
minds about state court?” Id. at 2. Newrez’s counsel answered:            
    I think it will be more efficient to proceed on the [State Lawsuit] filed 
    by you—Ms. Singleton’s current counsel—on the petition you drafted,  
    rather  than  her  former  counsel’s  lawsuit  and  petition  that  mis-

2 Vu is incorrectly identified as Vo in the State Lawsuit.                
    identified the third-party purchasers as a substitute trustee. Give me 
    a call if you’d like to discuss in more detail.                      

    Otherwise, is Ms. Singleton opposed or unopposed to reopening the    
    [State L]awsuit?                                                     
Id. at 1. In response, Singleton’s counsel stated: “We are unopposed.” Id. With that 
confirmation, Newrez filed an Unopposed Motion to Un-Abate Case in the State 
Lawsuit on June 18, 2025. Dkt. 19-7.                                      
    Newrez also filed a motion for summary judgment in the State Lawsuit on 
June 18, 2025, seeking dismissal of Singleton’s claims with prejudice. On July 23, 
2025, the state court judge granted Newrez’s motion, dismissing the State Lawsuit 
with  prejudice.  See  Dkt.  18-2.  The  order  granting  the  motion  for  summary 
judgment reflects that it “is a final judgment, and is appealable.” Id. at 2. 
              SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD                                  
    Summary judgment is proper when “there is no genuine dispute as to any 
material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Fed. R. 
Civ. P. 56(a). “A genuine issue of material fact exists when there is evidence 
sufficient for a rational trier of fact to find for the non-moving party.” Schnell v. 
State Farm Lloyds, 98 F.4th 150, 156 (5th Cir. 2024) (quotation omitted). “The 
movant has the burden of showing that there is no genuine issue of fact.” Anderson 
v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256 (1986). If the movant makes such a 
showing, “the burden shifts to the non-movant to produce evidence of the existence 
of such an issue for trial.” Brandon v. Sage Corp., 808 F.3d 266, 270 (5th Cir. 
2015) (quotation omitted). The nonmoving party “must go beyond the pleadings 
and come forward with specific facts indicating a genuine issue for trial to avoid 
summary judgment.” Id. (quotation omitted). At this stage, I “view all facts, and 
the  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  them,  in  the  light  most  favorable  to  the 
nonmovant.” Id. at 269 (quotation omitted).                               
                          ANALYSIS                                       
    In its motion for summary judgment, Newrez argues that “the elements of 
res judicata are conclusively established and [Singleton’s] claims and causes of 
action against Newrez are barred as a matter of law.” Dkt. 18 at 6. I agree.3 
    “Claim preclusion, or res judicata, bars the litigation of claims that either 
have been litigated or should have been raised in an earlier suit.” Test Masters 
Educ. Servs., Inc. v. Singh, 428 F.3d 559, 571 (5th Cir. 2005). The purpose of res 
judicata is to prevent vexatious litigation, promote judicial economy, and give 
finality to judgments. See Weaver v. Tex. Cap. Bank N.A., 660 F.3d 900, 908 (5th 
Cir. 2011).                                                               
    I must apply Texas law where, as here, the judgment at issue “was rendered 
by a Texas state court.” Wainscott v. Dallas County, 408 F. App’x 813, 815 (5th Cir. 
2011). The elements of res judicata under Texas law are “(1) a prior final judgment 
on the merits by a court of competent jurisdiction; (2) identity of parties or those 
in privity with them; and (3) a second action based on the same claims as were 
raised or could have been raised in the first action.” Harmon v. Dallas County, 927 
F.3d 884, 890 (5th Cir. 2019) (quoting Amstadt v. U.S. Brass Corp., 919 S.W.2d 
644, 652 (Tex. 1996)). All three elements are met here.                   
    First, the “state court’s grant of [Newrez’s motion for] summary judgment 
counts as a final judgment and carries the same preclusive effect in federal court 
that Texas state courts would afford it.” Thompson v. Dall. City Attorney’s Off., 
913 F.3d 464, 470 (5th Cir. 2019) (quotation omitted). Singleton argues that the 

3 Newrez also argues that the Rooker-Feldman doctrine bars a collateral attack on the 
State Lawsuit’s final judgment. This argument is contrary to Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Saudi 
Basic Industries Corp., in which the United States Supreme Court held that the Rooker-
Feldman doctrine did not bar a federal court from exercising jurisdiction simply because 
a later-filed state court action litigated to final judgment before a first-filed federal court 
action. 544 U.S. 280, 292 (2005) (“[N]either Rooker nor Feldman supports the notion 
that properly invoked concurrent jurisdiction vanishes if a state court reaches judgment 
on the same or related question while the case remains sub judice in a federal court.”). In 
that circumstance, the high court held that “[d]isposition of the federal action, once the 
state-court adjudication is complete, would be governed by preclusion law.” Id. at 293.  
state court judgment lacks finality because she is presently pursuing a bill of review 
in the state court system. This argument misses the mark. “A bill of review is an 
equitable proceeding to set aside a [final] judgment that is no longer appealable or 
subject to a motion for new trial.” Transworld Fin. Servs. Corp. v. Briscoe, 722 
S.W.2d 407, 407 (Tex. 1987). Under Singleton’s twisted logic, no judgment would 
ever constitute a final judgment for res judicata purposes because a party can 
always file a bill of review seeking to set aside a final judgment. This is not—and 
has never been—the law. By filing a bill of review, Singleton is acknowledging that 
there is a binding and enforceable final judgment in place. The first element is 
satisfied.                                                                
    Second,  the  parties  in  the  State  Lawsuit  and  the  Federal  Lawsuit  are 
identical. Singleton is the plaintiff in both cases. Newrez, Diep, and Vu are the 
defendants in both cases. The second element is satisfied.                
    Third, the Federal Lawsuit is based on the same claims that were raised or 
could have been raised in the State Lawsuit. Both lawsuits concern the same 
property, the same mortgage loan, the same alleged May 1, 2023 payment, and the 
same May 2, 2023 foreclosure sale. In both cases, Singleton asked the court to set 
aside the foreclosure sale, enjoin further foreclosure activity, and award monetary 
damages. There is no difference between the two actions, other than one was filed 
in federal court and one was filed in state court. The third element is satisfied. 
    The Federal Lawsuit is unquestionably barred by res judicata, and Newrez is 
entitled to summary judgment.                                             
    In a last-ditch effort to avoid summary judgment, Singleton claims that the 
application of res judicata here would be fundamentally unfair because she did not 
have a “full and fair opportunity” to litigate prior to the issuance of the State 
Lawsuit final judgment. Dkt. 19 at 10. It is Singleton’s position that, “due to her 
ongoing health issues, [Singleton’s counsel] was unable to prepare and file an 
opposition  to  Newrez’s  motion  [for  summary  judgment]  or  appear  at  the 
[summary judgment] hearing to defend her client.” Id. at 11. Although an exception 
to res judicata does exist if a party did not receive a full and fair opportunity to 
litigate her claims in state court, the exception is quite narrow. See Kremer v. 
Chem. Const. Corp., 456 U.S. 461, 481 n.22 (1982). “[S]howing that a party enjoyed 
a full and fair opportunity to litigate requires only that ‘state proceedings . . . do no 
more  than  satisfy  the  minimum  procedural  requirements  of  the  Fourteenth 
Amendment’s  Due  Process  Clause.’”  MEC,  Inc.  v.  Lowndes  Cnty.  Bd.  of 
Supervisors, 759 F. App’x 331, 337 (5th Cir. 2019) (quoting Kremer, 456 U.S. at 
481). “Satisfying these minimum procedural requirements is enough for state court 
judgments to retain their preclusive effect in federal courts.” MEC, Inc., 759 F. 
App’x at 337. As a general rule, “due process [i]s satisfied and . . . preclusion cannot 
be  defeated  by  dissatisfaction  with  the  quality  of  the  state  proceedings.”  Id. 
(quotation omitted); see also Kremer, 456 U.S. at 485 (a litigant’s “fail[ure] to avail 
himself of the full procedures provided by state law does not constitute a sign of 
their inadequacy”).                                                       
    I am genuinely sorry to hear that Singleton’s counsel suffered “a severe and 
ongoing  medical  crisis  that  required  hospitalization  and  prevented  her  from” 
adequately representing her client’s interests. Dkt. 19 at 6. Even if true, that is not 
a sufficient reason to ignore settled principles of res judicata.4 As the United States 
Supreme Court has explained:                                              
    [W]e do not see the grave injustice which would be done by the       
    application of accepted principles of res judicata. “Simple justice” is 
    achieved when a complex body of law developed over a period of years 
    is  evenhandedly  applied.  The  doctrine  of  res  judicata  serves  vital 
    public interests beyond any individual judge’s ad hoc determination  
    of the equities in a particular case.                                


4  Although  Singleton’s  counsel  contends  that  her  health  issues  prevented  her  from 
responding to the motion for summary judgment filed in the State Lawsuit, the record 
suggests otherwise. A day before the summary judgment response was due, Singleton’s 
counsel informed Newrez’s counsel by email that “things have been a bit more chaotic 
than usual. I’m in court today and trial tomorrow.” Dkt. 20-1 at 2.       
Federated Dept. Stores, Inc. v. Moitie, 452 U.S. 394, 401 (1981); see also Heiser v. 
Woodruff, 327 U.S. 726, 733 (1946) (There is simply “no principle of law or equity 
which sanctions the rejection by a federal court of the salutary principle of res 
judicata.”).                                                              
                         CONCLUSION                                      
    For the reasons discussed above, I recommend that Newrez’s motion for 
summary judgment be granted, and this case be dismissed in its entirety.5  
    The  parties  have  14  days  from  service  of  this  Memorandum  and 
Recommendation to file written objections. See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C); Fed. R. 
Civ. P. 72(b)(2). Failure to file timely objections will preclude appellate review of 
factual findings and legal conclusions, except for plain error.           
    SIGNED this     day of April 2026.                                   

                             ______________________________              
                                     ANDREW M. EDISON                    
                              UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE             




5 Although Diep and Vu are named as defendants in this action, there is no indication that 
either individual has been served. Nonetheless, “it is well-settled that a district court may 
grant summary judgment sua sponte, so long as the losing party has ten days notice to 
come forward with all of its evidence in opposition to summary judgment.” Love v. Nat’l 
Med. Enters., 230 F.3d 765, 770–71 (5th Cir. 2000) (quotation omitted). For the same 
reasons that res judicata precludes Singleton from pursuing the Federal Lawsuit against 
Newrez, res judicata bars Singleton’s claims against Diep and Vu in the Federal Lawsuit. 
As such, I sua sponte recommend that summary judgment be entered in favor of Diep and 
Vu. Singleton has 14 days to object to this Memorandum and Recommendation and 
explain why summary judgment should not be awarded to Diep and Vu on the basis of res 
judicata. See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b)(2).