UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                 DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              
____________________________________                                      
                            )                                           
STRIKE 3 HOLDINGS, LLC,       )                                           
                            )                                           
        Plaintiff,          )                                           
                            )                                           
                            )    Civil Action No. 1:26-CV-11368-AK      
v.                            )                                           
                            )                                           
JOHN DOE subscriber assigned IP address   )                               
73.234.43.14,                 )                                           
                            )                                           
        Defendant.          )                                           
                                                                      ) 

                  MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                  

A.  KELLEY, D.J.                                                        
   Plaintiff Strike 3 Holdings, LLC (“Strike 3”) brings this action against a John Doe 
(“Doe”) for copyright infringement.  Strike 3 owns several motion pictures, which it alleges Doe 
is downloading and distributing in violation of 17 U.S.C. Sections 101 and 501.  [Dkt. 1].  Doe 
uses BitTorrent, a protocol which can anonymously download and distribute content.  [Id.].  Due 
to its anonymity, the only information Strike 3 has about Doe is its protocol (“IP”) address.  For 
this reason, Strike 3 has submitted a motion for leave to serve a third-party subpoena on Comcast 
Cable, Doe’s internet service provider (“ISP”), to obtain the name and address of Doe.  [Dkt. 7].  
For the following reasons, Strike 3’s motion for leave to serve a third-party subpoena [Dkt. 7] is 
GRANTED SUBJECT TO CERTAIN RESTRICTIONS.                                  
I.   BACKGROUND                                                           
   Unless otherwise noted, the facts are presented as alleged in Strike 3’s complaint.  [Dkt. 
1].  Strike 3 is the owner of multiple adult films that are released on specific websites that the 
public must pay to access.  [Id.].  John Doe is allegedly infringing the copyright of thirty-seven 
Strike 3 films by illegally downloading and distributing them via a protocol known as 
BitTorrent, a system designed to quickly distribute large files over the Internet.  [Id.].  BitTorrent 
breaks down the original data media file into numerous pieces to create what is known as a 
“.torrent file.”  [Id.].  The end user must then obtain this file, as it corresponds to the piece of 
media that they wish to download.  Each of these files contain important metadata, which when 

put into the cryptographic algorithm, creates a “hash value”.  [Id.].  This is data used to identify 
the other pieces of the .torrent file, using the “Info Hash.”  [Id.].  Using this, an end user can 
collect every piece of the original file, and it is automatically reassembled into its original form.  
[Id.].                                                                    
   To track any potential infringers, Strike 3 developed a system called “VXN scan.”  [Id.].   
This system establishes a direct connection with IP addresses while Doe is using the BitTorrent 
network.  [Id.].  The system can then obtain the .torrent files and use them to download the 
corresponding media files.  [Id.].  These are compared to the original works to determine if they 
infringe on Strike 3’s copyright.  [Id.].  VXN Scan is then able to use the “Info Hash value,” 

which is in the metadata of the file, to download the file to verify if it is the same.  [Id.].  
   Strike 3 used this system to confirm and identify that Doe infringed thirty-seven of their 
films.  [Dkt. 1-1].  Exhibit A [Dkt. 1-1] shows the IP address of Doe, as well as the information 
obtained by VXN Scan.  [Id.].  Based on this data, Strike 3 alleges that Doe illegally 
downloaded, copied, and distributed their movies.  [Dkt. 1].  Doe’s IP address can serve to 
identify who they are, but only their ISP has the necessary information to connect it to the 
identity of John Doe.  [Id.].                                             
II.  LEGAL STANDARD                                                       
   Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(d) allows plaintiffs to seek a court order for discovery 
before the parties have conferred at a Rule 26(f) conference.  While the First Circuit has not 
established a standard for allowing a subpoena against a third-party prior to a Rule 26(f) 
conference, courts in this district require a showing of “good cause” to order Rule 26(d) 

discovery.  Strike 3 Holdings, Inc. v. Doe, 621 F. Supp. 3d 145, 149 (D. Mass 2022).  In addition 
to requiring “good cause” for an action, this district applies a five-factor test: “(1) a concrete 
showing of a prima facie claim of actionable harm; (2) specificity of the discovery request; (3) 
the absence of alternative means to obtain the subpoenaed information; (4) a central need for the 
subpoenaed information to advance the claim; and (5) the party’s expectation of privacy.”  
London-Sire Recs., Inc. v. Doe 1, 542 F. Supp. 2d 153, 164 (D. Mass. 2008) (quoting Sony 
Music Ent. Inc. v. Doe, 326 F. Supp. 2d 556, 564-65 (S.D.N.Y. 2004)).     
III.  DISCUSSION                                                          
   The Court first considers whether Strike 3 has made a “a concrete showing of a prima 

facie claim of actionable harm[.]”  London-Sire Recs., 542 F. Supp. 2d at 164.  In this case, the 
actionable harm is Doe’s copyright infringement.  To establish copyright infringement, the 
plaintiffs must establish two elements: “(1) ownership of a valid copyright, and (2) copying of 
constituent elements of the work that are original.”  Perea v. Ed. Cultural, Inc., 13 F.4th 43, 52 
(1st Cir. 2021) (quoting Latin Am. Music Co. Inc. v. Media Power Grp., Inc., 705 F.3d 34, 38 
(1st Cir. 2013)).  Strike 3 has stated that they own a copyright for the aforementioned films, 
[Dkt. 1-1], and Exhibit A of Strike 3’s complaint contains all the particulars surrounding their 
copyright in said films, including date of publication, date of registration, and the copyright 
registration number.  [Id.].  Doe copied Strike 3’s original work using the BitTorrent software, as 
described in Section I of this order.  Therefore, the first factor weighs in Strike 3’s favor.  
   The second element evaluates the “specificity of the discovery request.”  London-Sire 
Recs., 542 F. Supp. 2d at 164.  Strike 3 has limited its request to the name and address that is 
associated with the infringing IP address.  [Dkt. 7-1].  These two pieces of information are 

essential for the case to proceed.  See Malibu Media, LLC v. Doe, No. 15-CV-7788 (KMW), 
2016 WL 1651869 at *2 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 26, 2016).  The name and address of the IP user will 
allow Strike 3 to effectuate service against the defendant, and since it requests no other 
information, this factor weighs in favor of granting Strike 3’s request.  
   The third factor, “the absence of alternative means to obtain the subpoenaed 
information,” also weighs in favor of granting Strike 3’s request.  London-Sire Recs., 542 F. 
Supp. 2d at 164.  Doe’s ISP is the only entity that can identify the requested information using 
the IP address.  See Viken Detection Corp. v. Doe, No. 19-CV-12034-NMG, 2019 WL 5268725, 
at *1 (D. Mass. Oct. 17, 2019) (holding that the “only way the plaintiffs can realistically 

proceed” in a lawsuit against a John Doe defendant is to subpoena the ISP for the information 
connected to the IP address).  The BitTorrent software that Doe used is anonymous and Strike 3 
has no other information regarding the identity of Doe.                   
   The fourth element, “a central need for the subpoenaed information to advance the 
claim,” overlaps with the second and third factors, which the Court has already discussed.  
London-Sire Recs., 542 F. Supp. 2d at 164.  For Strike 3 to proceed with the suit, it needs the 
name and address of the John Doe defendant, and furthermore, its subpoena is limited to this 
information alone, so it is not excessive in scope.  See Malibu Media, 2016 WL 1651869 at *3 
(stating that the name and address of Doe defendant is “highly specific” because it is the “bare 
minimum needed . . . [to] effectuate service”).  Therefore, this factor also weighs in favor of 
Strike 3.                                                                 
   The fifth factor, “the party’s expectation of privacy,” also supports granting Strike 3’s 
request.  London-Sire Recs., 542 F. Supp. 2d at 164.  To overcome the right to anonymity, “there 
must be enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.”  Arista Recs. LLC v. 

Doe, 604 F.3d 110, 120 (2d Cir. 2010) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 548 
(2007)).  Strike 3 has stated a plausible claim of copyright infringement.  Moreover, Strike 3’s 
request is limited to only the name and address of Doe, which is necessary for it to proceed.  
Therefore, the fifth factor also weighs in favor of Strike 3.  In addition to granting this motion, 
the Court feels that it is appropriate to issue restrictions on the information that is obtained by 
Strike 3 to safeguard the privacy interests of the Doe Defendant.         
IV.  CONCLUSION                                                           
   For the foregoing reasons, Strike 3’s motion for leave to serve a third-party subpoena 
[Dkt. 7] is GRANTED, WITH THE FOLLOWING RESTRICTIONS:                     

•  Strike 3 may immediately serve a third-party subpoena upon Comcast Cable, pursuant to 
   Rule 45 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, requiring Comcast Cable to disclose 
   only the name and address of the subscriber associated with IP address 73.234.43.14.  
   The subpoena shall have a copy of this Order attached.               
•  Comcast Cable shall have 15 days from the date the subpoena is served upon it to serve 
   the affected internet subscriber with a copy of the subpoena and a copy of this Order.  
   Comcast Cable may use any reasonable means to do so, including but not limited to 
   written notice to the subscriber’s last known address.               
•  The internet subscriber shall have 30 days from the date of service of the subpoena upon 
   him or her to file any motion with the Court to quash or contest the subpoena, including 
   any request to litigate the subpoena anonymously.  Comcast Cable shall not produce any 
   subpoenaed information to Strike 3 during this period, without further order from this 

   court.                                                               
•  If this 30-day period lapses without the internet subscriber filing a motion to quash the 
   subpoena with this court with service upon Comcast Cable, Comcast Cable shall produce 
   to Strike 3 all information necessary to comply with the subpoena within 10 days 
   thereafter.                                                          
•  Pursuant to Rule 45, Comcast Cable may also move to contest the subpoena.  If it does 
   so, it shall ensure that its filings do not disclose to Strike 3 any identifying information 
   concerning the affected internet subscriber.                         
SO ORDERED.                                                               

Dated: April 10, 2026                   /s/ Angel Kelley                  
                                      Hon. Angel Kelley                 
                                      United States District Judge